Brief Report on the Current Situation 
Surrounding Inter-universal Teichmüller Theory (IUT) 
 
Shinichi Mochizuki 
August 2023 
 
 
 
Despite 
 
 - the publication in 2021 of the four main papers  [IUTchI], [IUTchII], [IUTchIII], 
[IUTchIV] on inter-universal Teichmüller theory (IUT) in a special volume of Publ. RIMS  
edited by a special editorial board consisting of such internationally renowned 
mathematicians as M. Kashiwara, A. Tamagawa, S. Mukai, H. Nakajima, and T. 
Mochizuki; 
 - the subsequent publication of the sequel [ExpEst] on explicit estimates in IUT in the Kodai 
Math. J. in 2022; 
 - the release of detailed surveys (cf. [Alien], [EssLgc]) concerning IUT;  
 - numerous workshops/talks/videos (cf. WS3, WS4) on IUT conducted/produced during the 
period 2012 – 2023; 
 - a pronounced shift in recent years  in the focus of activities of many researchers involved 
with IUT from activities devoted to disseminating the original version of IUT to activities 
centered around the development of various 
new versions/applications of IUT, many of 
which are closely related to the Section Conjecture in anabelian geometry, 
 
fundamental misunderstandings  and entirely unnecessary confusion  concerning IUT 
continue to persist in certain sectors of the mathematical community.  This includes   
profoundly factually inaccurate assertions to the effect that "the experts agree that the theory 
is mathematically incorrect".  On the other hand, countless attempts by the author of IUT, 
as well as other mathematicians involved with IUT, over the past decade --- cf., e.g., e-mails 
sent on June 30, 2022, and December 30, 2022, neither of which received any response! ---  
to pin down  

 
- precisely who these "experts" are and/or 
 - precisely what the mathematical content is that these "experts" assert to be "mathematically 
incorrect" 
 
have only been met with stubborn refusals to respond  to such queries.  Here, it is worth 
noting that this situation constitutes a very serious violation of article (6.) of the subsection 
entitled "Responsibilities of authors" of the Code of Practice of the European Mathematical 
Society (cf. EMSCOP): 
 
           Mathematicians should not make public claims of potential new  
           theorems or the resolution of particular mathematical problems  
           unless they are able to provide full details in a timely manner.  
 
This confusion has also manifested itself in a sort of bizarre schizophrenia on the part of many 
senior, high-ranking members of the mathematical community.  That is to say,  
 
 - whereas some senior, high -ranking members of the European mathematical community 
have maintained for years, both in oral communications to the author of IUT, as well as in 
numerous internet posts, that the incorrect mathematical content referred to abov e    
revolves around the issue of 
"redundant copies" (as discussed in detail in [EssLgc]), other 
senior, high-ranking members of the European mathematical community have asserted 
strongly that they could not believe that this issue of "redundant copies" could be the    
focal point of objections to the mathematical validity of IUT, on the grounds that they 
could not believe that fellow senior, high-ranking members of the European mathematical 
community could be confused about such an elementary mathematical issue; 
 - whereas some senior, high -ranking members of the European mathematical community 
have maintained for years, both in oral communications to mathematicians involved with 
IUT and in written form (cf., e.g., the Zentralblatt review of the IUT papers!) , that "the 
experts agree that the theory is mathematically incorrect", one (very) senior, high-ranking 
member of the European mathematical  community ha s asserted categorically (in a 
personal oral communication) that neither he nor his colleagues take such assertions (of a 
mathematical gap in IUT) seriously! 
 
In light of the circumstances just described, one central aspect of dissemination activities 
concerning IUT over the past decade has consisted of stimulating the worldwide mathematical 

community to strongly encourage mathematicians to 
 
 (*) bear explicit responsibility  for any assertion that denies the essential mathematical 
validity of IUT by expressing any such assertion --- not in an informal manner, via rough 
oral communications, internet posts, or nonrigorously formulated arguments, but rather 
--- in the form of a precisely formulated mathematical paper  with complete, rigorous 
proofs that is written in such a fashion that it is suitable for publication in a well -
established mathematical journal. 
 
This goal (*) may be understood as the goal of achieving compliance with the passage of the 
EMSCOP quoted above.  Alternatively, this goal (*) may  be understood as the goal of 
addressing, in a fundamental and definitive  fashion, the entirely unnecessary confusion and 
schizophrenia discussed above, by putting assertions of the sort referred to in (*) in a form 
that is well-defined and can hence be subject, via conventional scholarly  activities (i.e., 
workshops/seminars, further research, etc.), to the scrutiny of the mathematical community, 
not only in the present, but also for decades (or even centuries!) to come (cf. the discussion 
of the historical significance of explicit written documentation of mathematical arguments in 
[EssLgc], §1.5). 
 
Perhaps the IUT Challenger Prize  announced by Mr. Nobuo Kawakami in July 2023 can 
further stimulate the worldwide mathematical community to realize the importance, for the 
entire field of mathematics, of conducting oneself in a fashion consistent with (*). 
 
In some sense, the model of the many of the dissemination activities referred to above may be 
understood as the discussions between Emmanuel Lepage (a maître de conférences at  
Sorbonne University in France) and the author of IUT during the years 2017 - 2021. At the 
outset of these discussions (in the summer of 2017), Lepage took a deeply skeptical position 
with regard to the mathematical validity of IUT.  On the other hand, it was precisely as a 
result of his sincere efforts during the period 2017 - 2021 to respond to repeated requests by 
the author of IUT to make his objections to the mathematical validity of  IUT precise and 
explicit that Lepage was finally able to realize  and acknowledge explicitly that his objections 
to IUT were purely psychological, that he had misunderstood IUT, and that he no longer had 
any mathematical reasons not to acknowledge the mathematical validity of  IUT.  These 
discussions with Lepage formed the basis of a substantial portion of the discussion given in 
the latter portion of [EssLgc], §3.  Thus, in summary, one may  think of the goal of the 
dissemination activities referred to above as the goal of 

 
 (**) performing a massive global search for professional mathematicians who assert that they 
have mathematical reasons not to acknowledge the mathematical validity of IUT, in the 
hope that stimulating such mathematicians to perform the "exercise" of documenting 
these mathematical reasons in a precise and explicit fashion can trigger a comparably 
dramatic evolution of understanding  for such mathematicians to the evolution of 
understanding experienced by Lepage during discussions with the author of IUT in 
2017 - 2021. 
       
Finally, we note that, in this context, it is of fundamental importance to distinguish between 
 
 - mathematicians who do not acknowledge the mathematical validity of  I UT for 
nonmathematical (such as social/political/psychological) reasons and 
 - mathematicians who do not acknowledge the mathematical validity of  IUT for 
mathematical reasons. 
 
Indeed, one way to understand the goal of the dissemination activities referred to above is as 
the goal of issuing 
 
 (***) a clear and unequivocal message to the worldwide mathematical community that the 
denial of the mathematical validity of a  mathematical theory published in a well -
established mathematical journal for nonmathematical reasons is entirely unacceptable 
(cf., e.g., the passage of the EMSCOP quoted above!), and that the         
fundamental importance, from the point of view of the sound development of the entire 
field of pure mathematics, of providing mathematical reasons for any such denial of the 
mathematical validity of a mathematical theory transcends the specific case of         
IUT and indeed cuts to the very core of what it means to practice pure mathematics. 