AT H E O R YO FO R D I N A R YP - A D I CC U R V E S
A Theory of Ordinary p-adic Curves
By
Shinichi MOCHIZUKI*
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Introduction
§0. Statement of Main Results
§1. Review of the Complex Theory
Beltrami Diﬀerentials
The Beltrami Equation
The Series Expansion of a Quasiconformal Function
Uniformization of Hyperbolic Riemann Surfaces
Uniformization of Moduli Stacks of Hyperbolic Riemann Surfaces
Quasidisks and the Bers Embedding
The Inﬁnitesimal Form of the Modular Uniformizations
Coordinates of Degeneration
The Parabolic Case
Real Curves
§2. Translation into the p-adic Case
Gunning’s Theory of Indigenous Bundles
The Canonical Coordinates Associated to a K¨ahler Metric
The Weil-Petersson Metric from the Point of View of Indigenous Bundles
The Philosophy of K¨ahler Metrics as Frobenius Liftings
The Dictionary
Loose Ends
Received September 8, 1995. Revised October 2, 1996.
1991 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation: 14H10, 14F30
* Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606, Japan
1

Chapter I: Crystalline Projective Structures
§0. Introduction
§1. Schwarz Structures
Notation and Basic Deﬁnitions
First Properties of Schwarz Structures
Crystalline Schwarz Structures and Monodromy
Correspondence with P
1-bundles
Schwarz Structures and Square Diﬀerentials
Normalized P1-bundles with Connection
The Schwarzian Derivative
§2. Indigenous Bundles
Basic Deﬁnitions and Examples
First Properties
Existence and de Rham Cohomology
Indigenous Bundles of Restrictable Type
§3. The Obstruction to Global Intrinsicity
Introduction of Cohomology Classes
Computation of the Second Chern Class
The Case of Dimension One
Appendix: Relation to the Complex Analytic Case
Chapter II: Indigenous Bundles in Characteristic p
§0. Introduction
§1. FL-Bundles
Deformations and FL-Bundles
The p-Curvature of an FL-Bundle
§2. The Verschiebung on Indigenous Bundles
The Deﬁnition of The Verschiebung
The p-Curvature of an Admissible Indigenous Bundle
The Inﬁnitesimal Verschiebung
Diﬀerential Criterion for Admissibility
2

§3. Hyperbolically Ordinary Curves
Basic Deﬁnitions
The Totally Degenerate Case
The Case of Elliptic Curves: The Parabolic Picture
The Case of Elliptic Curves: The Hyperbolic Picture
The Generic Uniformization Number
Chapter III: Canonical Modular Frobenius Liftings
§0. Introduction
§1. Generalities on Ordinary Frobenius Liftings
Basic Deﬁnitions
The Uniformizing Galois Representation
The Canonical p-divisible Group
Logarithms of Periods
Compatibility of Diﬀerentials
Canonical Liftings of Points in Characteristic p
Canonical Multiplicative Parameters
Canonical Aﬃne Coordinates
The Relationship Between Aﬃne and Multiplicative Parameters
§2. Construction of the Canonical Frobenius Lifting
Modular Frobenius Liftings
Indigenous Sections of D
Frobenius Invariant Indigenous Bundles
§3. Applications of the Canonical Frobenius Liftings
Canonical Liftings of Curves over Witt Vectors
Canonical Aﬃne Coordinates on M
g,r
Topological Markings and Uniformization by Quadratic Diﬀerentials
Canonical Multiplicative Parameters
The Case of Elliptic Curves
Chapter IV: Canonical Curves
§0. Introduction
3

§1. The Canonical Galois Representation
Construction and Global Properties
The Horizontal Section over the Ordinary Locus
The Canonical Frobenius Lifting over the Ordinary Locus
§2. The Canonical Log p-divisible Group
Log p-divisible Groups at Inﬁnity
Construction of the Canonical Log p-divisible Group
Review of the Theory of [Katz-Mazur]
§3. The Compactiﬁed Canonical Frobenius Lifting
The Canonical Frobenius Lifting and the Canonical Log p-divisible Group
Local Analysis at Supersingular Points
Global Hecke Correspondences
§4. p-adic Green’s Functions
Compactiﬁed Frobenius Liftings
The Height of a Frobenius Lifting
Admissible Frobenius Liftings
Geometric Criterion for Canonicality
Chapter V: Uniformizations of Ordinary Curves
§0. Introduction
§1. Crystalline Induction
The Crystalline-Induced MF
∇ -object
The Ring of Additive Periods
The Crystalline-Induced Galois Representation
Relation to the Canonical Aﬃne Coordinates
The Parabolic Case
§2. Canonical Objects over the Stack of Multiplicative Periods
The Stack of Multiplicative Periods
The Canonical Log p-divisible Group
The Canonical Frobenius Lifting
Bibliography
Index
4

Introduction
§0. Statement of Main Results
The goal of this paper is to present a theory ofr-pointed stable curves of genusg over
p-adic schemes (for p odd), which, on the one hand, generalizes the Serre-Tate theory of
ordinary elliptic curves to the hyperbolic case (i.e., 2g − 2+ r ≥ 1), and, on the other hand,
generalizes the complex uniformization theory of hyperbolic Riemann surfaces (reviewed in
§1 of this introductory Chapter) due to Ahlfors, Bers, et al. to thep-adic case. We begin by
setting up the necessary algebraic machinery: that is, the language of indigenous bundles
(due to Gunning, although we rephrase Gunning’s results in a more algebraic form). An
indigenous bundle is a P
1-bundle over a curve, together with a connection, that satisfy
certain properties. One may think of an indigenous bundle as an algebraic way of encoding
uniformization data for a curve. We then study the p-curvature of indigenous bundles in
characteristic p, and show that a generic r-pointed stable curve of genus g has a ﬁnite,
nonzero number of distinguished indigenous bundles (P, ∇
P ), which are characterized by
the following two properties:
(1) the p-curvature of (P, ∇P ) is nilpotent;
(2) the space of indigenous bundles with nilpotentp-curvature is ´etale over
the moduli stack of curves at (P, ∇P ).
We call such (P, ∇P ) nilpotent and ordinary, and we call curves ordinary if they admit at
least one such nilpotent, ordinary indigenous bundle. If a curve is ordinary, then choos-
ing any one of the ﬁnite number of nilpotent, ordinary indigenous bundles on the curve
completely determines the “uniformization theory of the curve” – to be described in the
following paragraphs. Because of this, we refer to this choice as the choice of a p-adic
quasiconformal equivalence class to which the curve belongs.
After studying various basic properties of ordinary curves and ordinary indigenous
bundles in characteristic p, we then consider the p-adic theory. Let
Mg,r be the moduli
stack of r-pointed stable curves of genus g over Zp. Then we show that there exists a
canonical p-adic (nonempty) formal stack N
ord
g,r together with an ´etale morphism
N
ord
g,r → Mg,r
such that modulo p, N
ord
g,r is the moduli stack of ordinary r-pointed curves of genus g,
together with a choice of p-adic quasiconformal equivalence class. Moreover, the generic
degree of N
ord
g,r over Mg,r is > 1 (as long as 2g − 2+ r ≥ 1a n dp is suﬃciently large). It is
over N
ord
g,r that most of our theory will take place. Our ﬁrst main result is the following:
5

Theorem 0.1. Let Clog → (N
ord
g,r )log (where the “log” refers to canonical log stack struc-
tures) be the tautological ordinary r-pointed stable curve of genus g. Then there exists a
canonical Frobenius lifting Φlog
N on (N
ord
g,r )log, together with a canonical indigenous bun-
dle (P, ∇P ) on Clog. Moreover, Φlog
N and (P, ∇P ) are uniquely characterized by the fact
(P, ∇P ) is “Frobenius invariant” (in some suitable sense) with respect toΦlog
N .
Moreover, there is an open p-adic formal substack Cord ⊆C of “ordinary points” of
the curve. The open formal substack Cord ⊆C is dense in every ﬁber of C over N
ord
g,r .A l s o ,
there is a unique canonical Frobenius lifting
Φlog
C :( Clog)ord → (Clog)ord
which is Φlog
N -linear and compatible with the Hodge section of the canonical indigenous
bundle (P, ∇P ). Finally, Φlog
C and Φlog
N have various functoriality properties, such as func-
toriality with respect to “log admissible coverings ofClog” and with respect to restriction to
the boundary of Mg,r.
This Theorem is an amalgamation of Theorem 2.8 of Chapter III and Theorem 2.6 of
Chapter V. In some sense all other results in this paper are formal consequences of the
above Theorem. For instance,
Corollary 0.2. The Frobenius lifting Φlog
N allows one to deﬁne canonical aﬃne local
coordinates on Mg,r at an ordinary point α valued in k, a perfect ﬁeld of characteristic
p. These coordinates are well-deﬁned as soon as one chooses a quasiconformal equivalence
class to whichα belongs. Also, at a pointα ∈ Mg,r(k) corresponding to a totally degenerate
curve, Φlog
N deﬁnes canonical multiplicative local coordinates.
This Corollary follows from Chapter III, Theorem 3.8 and Deﬁnition 3.13.
Let α ∈ N
ord
g,r (A), where A = W(k), the ring of Witt vectors with coeﬃcients in a
perfect ﬁeld of characteristic p.I f α corresponds to a morphism Spec( A) → N
ord
g,r which
is Frobenius equivariant (with respect to the natural Frobenius on A and the Frobenius
lifting Φlog
N on N
ord
g,r ), then we call the curve corresponding to α canonical.L e t K be the
quotient ﬁeld of A.L e tG L±
2 (−) be the group scheme which is the quotient of GL2(−)b y
{±1}.
Theorem 0.3. Once one ﬁxes a k-valued point α0 of N
ord
g,r , there is a unique canonical
α ∈ N
ord
g,r (A) that lifts α0. Moreover, if a curve Xlog → Spec(A) is canonical, it admits
(1) A canonical dual crystalline (in the sense of [Falt], §2) Galois repre-
sentation ρ: π1(XK) → GL±
2 (Zp) (which satisﬁes certain properties);
6

(2) A canonical logp-divisible group Glog (up to {±1})o n Xlog whose Tate
module deﬁnes the representation ρ;
(3) A canonical Frobenius lifting Φlog
X :( Xlog)ord → (Xlog)ord over the
ordinary locus (which satisﬁes certain properties).
Moreover, if a lifting Xlog → Spec(A) of α0 has any one of these objects (1) through (3)
(satisfying various properties), then it is canonical.
This Theorem results from Chapter III, Theorem 3.2, Corollary 3.4; Chapter IV, Theorem
1.1, Theorem 1.6, Deﬁnition 2.2, Proposition 2.3, Theorem 4.17.
The case of curves with ordinary reduction modulo p which are not canonical is more
complicated. Let us consider the universal case. Thus, let Slog =( N
ord
g,r )log;l e t flog :
Xlog → Slog be the universal r-pointed stable curve of genus g.L e t Tlog → Slog be
the ﬁnite covering (log ´etale in characteristic zero) which is the Frobenius lifting Φ log
N of
Theorem 0.1. Let Plog → Slog be the inverse limit of the coverings of Slog which are
iterates of the Frobenius lifting Φlog
N .L e tXlog
T = Xlog ×Slog Tlog; Xlog
P = Xlog ×Slog Plog.
We would like to consider the arithmetic fundamental groups
Π1
def
= π1((Xlog
T )Qp ); Π ∞
def
= π1((Xlog
P )Qp )
Unlike the case of canonical curves, we do not get a canonical Galois representation of Π1
into GL±
2 (Zp). Instead, we have the following
Theorem 0.4. There is a canonical Galois representation
ρ∞ :Π ∞ → GL±
2 (Zp)
Moreover, the obstruction to extendingρ∞ to Π1 is nontrivial and is measured precisely by
the extent to which the canonical aﬃne coordinates (of Corollary 0.2) are nonzero. Also,
there is a ring DGal
S with a continuous action of π1(Tlog
Qp ) such that we have a canonical
dual crystalline representation
ρ1 :Π 1 → GL±
2 (DGal
S )
(i.e., this is a twisted homomorphism, with respect to the action of Π1 (acting through
π1(Tlog
Qp ))o n DGal
S ). Finally, the ring DGal
S has an augmentation DGal
S → Zp which is
Π∞ -equivariant (for the trivial action on Zp) and which is such that after restricting to
Π∞ , and base changing by means of this augmentation, ρ1 reduces to ρ∞ .
7

This follows from Chapter V, Theorems 1.4 and 1.7.
All along, we note that when one specializes the theory to the case of elliptic curves,
one recovers the familiar classical theory of Serre-Tate. For instance, the deﬁnitions of
“ordinary curves” and “canonical liftings” specialize to the objects with the same names
in Serre-Tate theory. Thep-adic canonical coordinates on the moduli stackM
g,r (Corollary
0.2) specialize to the Serre-Tate parameter. The Galois obstruction to extending ρ∞ to
a representation of Π 1 specializes to the obstruction to splitting the well-known exact
sequence of Galois modules that the p-adic Tate module of an ordinary elliptic curve ﬁts
into.
For more detailed accounts of the results in each Chapter, we refer to the introductory
sections at the beginnings of each of the Chapters. In the rest of this introductory Chapter,
we explain the relationship between thep-adic case and the classically known complex case.
Acknowledgements: I would like to thank Prof. Barry Mazur of Harvard University for
providing the stimulating environment (during the Spring of 1994) in which this paper
was written. Also, I would like to thank both Prof. Mazur and Prof. Yasutaka Ihara
(of RIMS, Kyoto University) for their eﬀorts in assisting me to publish this paper, and
for permitting me to hold lecture series at Harvard (Spring of 1994) and RIMS (Fall of
1994), respectively, during which I discussed the contents of this paper. Finally, I would
like to thank Prof. Ihara for informing me of the theory of [Ih], [Ih2], [Ih3], and [Ih4].
This theory anticipates many aspects of the theory of the present paper (especially, the
discussion of Frobenius liftings and pseudo-correspondences in Chapters III and IV). On
the other hand, the techniques and point of view of Prof. Ihara’s theory diﬀer substantially
from those of the present paper. Moreover, from a rigorous, mathematical point of view,
the main results of Prof. Ihara’s theory neither imply nor are implied by the main results
of the present paper. However, it is the author’s subjective opinion that philosophically,
the motivation behind Prof. Ihara’s theory was much the same as that of the author’s.
§1. Review of the Complex Theory
In order to explain the meaning of the main results of this paper, it is ﬁrst necessary
to review the complex theory of uniformization in a fashion that makes the generalization
to ﬁnite primes more natural. This is the goal of the present Section. Since all of the
material is “standard” and “well-known,” we shall, of course, omit proofs, instead citing
references for major results. We shall say that a Riemann surface X is of ﬁnite type
if it can be obtained by removing a ﬁnite number of points p
1,... ,pr from a compact
Riemann surface Y of genus g. Note that in this case, Y and {p1,... ,pr } are uniquely
determined up to isomorphism. We shall say that the Riemann surface of ﬁnite type X is
hyperbolic (respectively, parabolic; elliptic)i f2 g − 2+ r ≥ 1 (respectively, 2g − 2+ r =0 ;
2g − 2+ r< 0). In this paper, we shall be concerned exclusively with Riemann surfaces
of ﬁnite type (and their uniformizations). This is because it is precisely these Riemann
surfaces which correspond to algebraic objects. Also, we shall mainly be concerned with
8

the hyperbolic case, since this is the most diﬃcult. Indeed, from the point of view of
the theory of uniformization and moduli, the elliptic case is completely trivial, and the
parabolic case (although nontrivial) is relatively easy and explicit.
In some sense, the theme of our review of the classical complex theory is that in most
cases, there are two ways to approach results: the “classical” and the “quasiconformal.”
Typically, the classical approach was known earlier, and is more geometric and intuitive.
On the other hand, the classical approach has the drawback of producing theories and
results that are only real analytic, rather than holomorphic in nature. By contrast the
quasiconformal approach, which was pioneered by Ahlfors and Bers, tends to give rise to
holomorphic structures and results naturally. It is thus natural that the connection between
the “quasiconformal approach” and the p-adic theory should be much more natural and
transparent.
Beltrami Diﬀerentials
Let X be a Riemann surface (not necessarily of ﬁnite type). Let us consider the
complex line bundle τ
X ⊗ ωX on X,w h e r eωX is the complex conjugate bundle to the
canonical bundle ωX,a n dτX is the tangent bundle. Note that if s is a section of τX ⊗ ωX
over X, then we can consider itsL∞ -norm ∥s∥∞ , since the transition functions ofτX ⊗ ωX
have complex absolute value 1. A Beltrami diﬀerentialμ on X is a measurable section of
the line bundle
τX ⊗ ωX
such that ∥μ∥∞ < 1.
Why the bundle τX ⊗ ωX? The reason is that this bundle is closely connected with
the moduli of the Riemann surface X. Indeed, Let us consider an arbitrary C∞ section μ
of τX ⊗ ωX.N o w s i n c eτX has the structure of a holomorphic line bundle, we have a ∂
operator on τX.I fw el o o ka tg l o b a lC∞ sections, this gives us a complex
C∞ (X,τX)
∂
−→ C ∞ (X,τX ⊗ ωX)
which computes the analytic cohomology of τX.I f X is, for instance, compact, then this
analytic cohomology coincides with the cohomology in the Zariski topology of the algebraic
tangent bundle. Thus, for X compact and hyperbolic, the above complex has cohomology
groups H
0 =0 ,a n dH1 = H1(X,τX), which is well-known to be the space of inﬁnitesimal
deformations of X.M o r e o v e r ,i fX is compact of genusg ≥ 2, and Mg is the moduli stack
of curves of genus g,t h e nH1(X,τX) is precisely the tangent space to Mg at the point
deﬁned by X.
At any rate, (for X arbitrary) we have a natural surjection
9

C∞ (X,τX ⊗ ωX) → H1(X,τX)
Thus, the image of μ under this surjection deﬁnes an inﬁnitesimal deformation of the
complex structure of X. This establishes the relationship between sections of
τX ⊗ ωX
and the moduli of X. The reason for considering measurable, rather than just C∞ , sec-
tions is that it is easier to obtain solutions to a certain diﬀerential equation, the Beltrami
equation, when one works in this greater generality.
The Beltrami Equation
Having established the relationship between sections of τX ⊗ ωX and inﬁnitesimal
deformations, we now would like to integrate – i.e., to “give a reciprocity law” – that
assigns to a section μ of τX ⊗ ωX not just an inﬁnitesimal deformation of X, but an actual
new Riemann surface, i.e., a new complex structure on the topological manifold underlying
X. To do this, we consider the Beltrami equation
∂f = μ · ∂f
which we regard as a diﬀerential equation in the unknown function f. It is a nontrivial
result (proven, for instance, in [Lehto2]) that when μ is a Beltrami diﬀerential, there
exist local L2 solutions f to the Beltrami equation that are homeomorphisms (where they
are deﬁned). Such functions f are called quasiconformal (with dilatation μ).I f f and
g (deﬁned on some open set U ⊆ X) are both quasiconformal with the same dilatation
μ, then it is easy to see that ∂ applied to f ◦g−1 (in the distributional sense) is zero.
That is, f = h ◦g for some biholomorphic function h. Thus, up to composition with a
biholomorphic function, quasiconformal solutions to the Beltrami equation are unique.
With these observations, we can deﬁne a new complex structure on X associated to
a Beltrami diﬀerential μ as follows. Let us call the resulting Riemann surface Xμ.T h u s ,
the underlying topological manifold of Xμ is the same as that of X. On an open set
U ⊆ X, we take a local quasiconformal function f of dilatation μ, and deﬁne it to be
a holomorphic function on Xμ. By the essential uniqueness of solutions to the Beltrami
equation, everything is well-deﬁned, and so we obtain a new global Riemann surface Xμ.
Thus, the assignment
μ ↦→ Xμ
is the fundamental “reciprocity law” that we are looking for.
10

The Series Expansion of a Quasiconformal Function
In order to really understand the Beltrami equation, it is useful to look at the explicit
representation of its solutions as series “in μ” (as in [Lehto], pp. 25-27). We begin by
considering Cauchy’s integral formula:
f(z)= 1
2πi
∫
∂D
f(ζ) dζ
ζ− z − 1
π
∫∫
D
∂f(ζ) dξdη
ζ− z
for a function f with L1 d e r i v a t i v e so na no p e nd i s kD in the complex plane. Thus, if f
(and its L1 derivatives) are deﬁned on all of C,a n df(z) → 0a s z →∞ , then we obtain
f(z)= T ∂f
where T is the operator on C∞ functions ω with compact support given by
(Tω )(z)= − 1
π
∫∫
C
ω(ζ) dξdη
ζ− z
Put another way, (from the point of view of the theory of pseudodiﬀerential operators) T
is the parametrix for the elliptic diﬀerential operator ∂. If we deﬁne the Hilbert transfor-
mation H by
(Hω )(z)= − 1
π
∫∫
C
ω(ζ) dξdη
(ζ− z)2
then we obtain that ∂T = H. Also, it can be shown that ∂ and ∂ commute with both T
and H.
Now let us suppose thatμ is a Beltrami diﬀerential onC (say, with compact support),
and that f is quasiconformal on C with dilatation μ.T h e nf is holomorphic at inﬁnity,
and so, after normalization, in a neighborhood of inﬁnity, it looks like
f(z)= z +
∑
n≥1
bnz−n
for some bn ∈ C.T h u s ,f(z) − z goes to 0 as z →∞ , so we obtain that
∂f(z)=1+ ∂{f(z) − z}
=1+ ∂T∂{f(z) − z}
=1+ H∂f(z)
11

Thus, since ∂f = μ · ∂f, it follows that
∂f = μ+ μ · H∂f
This integral equation has the formal solution
∂f =
∑
i≥0
(μ · H)iμ
which converges in L2 because
(1) it can be shown that H extends to an isometry L2 → L2;
(2) since μ is a Beltrami diﬀerential, ∥μ∥∞ < 1 (which thus explains this
part of the deﬁnition of a Beltrami diﬀerential).
Thus, applying the operator T, we get the series solution
f(z)= z + T {
∑
i≥0
(μ · H)iμ}
to the Beltrami equation.
From our point of view, this series solution has two important consequences. First of
all, the set of all possible μ clearly form an open subset of a (rather large) complex vector
space (i.e., the space of measurable sections of τX ⊗ ωX). Thus, relative to the complex
structure of this complex vector space, the series solution makes it clear that f depends
holomorphically on μ. Second, it computes the inﬁnitesimal change in f as μ varies to ﬁrst
order. Namely, this term is given by φ
def
= T(μ). Note that
∂φ= μ
It turns out that this result – that∂ applied to the inﬁnitesimal change φ in the solution to
the Beltrami equation gives us back μ – holds for arbitrary Beltrami diﬀerentials μ. (See,
e.g., [Gard], p. 72).
The reason why this observation is interesting is as follows. Suppose, for simplicity,
that μ is C∞ .L e t U be an open covering of X such that the intersection of any ﬁnite
collection of open sets in U is Stein. Then by considering the standard isomorphism
between the ˇCech cohomology (with respect to U)a n dt h e∂-cohomology of τX,i tt h u s
follows that the inﬁnitesimal deformationXϵ·μ (where ϵ is “small”) in the complex structure
of X given by solving the Beltrami equation is precisely the same as the inﬁnitesimal
deformation given by mapping μ to H1(X,τX) via the surjection
12

C∞ (X,τX ⊗ ωX) → H1(X,τX)
considered previously. This completes the justiﬁcation of the claim that the assignment
μ ↦→ Xμ is an “integrated version” of the “inﬁnitesimal reciprocity law”
C∞ (X,τX ⊗ ωX) → H1(X,τX)
that follows just from the deﬁnition of the ∂-cohomology of τX.
Uniformization of Hyperbolic Riemann Surfaces
Let X be a hyperbolic Riemann surface. Let ˜X be its universal covering space. Thus,
˜X inherits a natural complex structure from X. Then one of the most basic results in the
ﬁeld is that we have an isomorphism of Riemann surfaces
˜X ∼= H
where H is the upper half plane. By considering the covering transformations of H → X,
we get a homomorphism (well-deﬁned up to conjugation)
ρ: π1(X) → Aut(H) ⊆ PSL2(R)
which we call the canonical representation ofX.
There are (at least) two ways to prove this result. The ﬁrst approach is the classical
approach, and goes back to Koebe’s work in the early twentieth century. It involves
considering Green’s functions G(−, −)o n ˜X. There is an intrinsic, a priori deﬁnition of
Green’s functions, which is not important for us here.A posteriori, that is, once one knows
that ˜X ∼= H, we can pull-back the hyperbolic metric
dx
2 + dy2
y2
on H to ˜X, so that we obtain a hyperbolic distance function on ˜X.T h e nG(x, y)( f o r
x, y ∈ ˜X) is given by the logarithm of the hyperbolic distance between x and y.O n ec a n
ﬁnd a detailed exposition of this approach in [FK].
The second approach (which is more relevant to the p-adic case) is the approach of
Bers ([Bers]). Suppose that X is obtained by removing r points from a compact Riemann
surface Y of genus g. Then one ﬁrst observes that there exists a Riemann surface X′
which is obtained by removing r points from a compact Riemann surface of genus g and
whose universal covering space ˜X′ is isomorphic to H. Then one constructs (from purely
13

elementary considerations) a quasiconformal homeomorphism X′ ∼= X. This quasiconfor-
mal homeomorphism deﬁnes a Beltrami diﬀerential μ on X′, which we can pull back to
˜X′ ∼= H to obtain a Beltrami diﬀerential μH on H. By reﬂection, one extends μH to a
Beltrami diﬀerential ˜μ on C. Then we solve the Beltrami equation for ˜μ on C so that we
obtain a quasiconformal homeomorphism
f˜μ : C → C
which goes to inﬁnity at inﬁnity. Let Γ ′ be the group of M¨obius transformation of H
deﬁned by the covering transformations of ˜X′ over X′.T h u s ,H/Γ′ ∼= X′. Then it follows
from the uniqueness of solutions to the Beltrami equation that
Γ
def
= f˜μ ◦Γ′ ◦f −1
˜μ
forms a group of M¨obius transformations on C. Moreover, from the reﬂection symmetry
of ˜μ, it follows that f˜μ preserves the real axis, and hence so does Γ. It thus follows that
H/Γ is a Riemann surface of ﬁnite type, and, by the deﬁnition of μ,t h a tH/Γ ∼= X.T h i s
completes the proof.
It turns out that it is this approach of uniformizing a single Riemann surface (for each
g, r) and then “parallel transporting” the result over the rest of the moduli space that will
carry over to the p-adic case.
Uniformization of Moduli Stacks of Hyperbolic Riemann Surfaces
Let Mg,r be the moduli stack ofr-pointed smooth algebraic curves of genusg over C.
Let ˜Mg,r be its universal covering space. Then the problem of uniformization of moduli is
to give an explicit representation of˜Mg,r. From the point of view of the Beltrami equation,
this amounts to ﬁnding a small, ﬁnite-dimensional subspace T of the space of Beltrami
diﬀerentials μ such that the assignment μ ↦→ Xμ deﬁnes a covering space map T →M g,r.
We begin by ﬁxing a “base point” ofMg,r, which corresponds to a hyperbolic Riemann
surface X.L e t M(X) be the space of Beltrami diﬀerentials on X.L e t Q be the space
of holomorphic quadratic diﬀerentials on X with at most simple poles at the punctured
points. Then there are two approaches to deﬁning morphisms from open subsets of Q
into spaces of Beltrami diﬀerentials. The ﬁrst approach is that of Teichm¨ uller. In this
approach, if φ ∈ Q,w ed e ﬁ n ean o r m
∥φ∥
def
=
∫
X
|φ|
Let V ⊆ Q be the set of φ with ∥φ∥≤ 1. Then Teichm¨uller’s uniformization map, for
(nonzero) φ ∈ V ,i sg i v e nb y
14

φ ↦→ μφ
def
=( ∥φ∥) φ
|φ|
where φ ∈ Γ(X, ω⊗2
X ) is the complex conjugate of φ. It is easy to see that μφ deﬁnes a
Beltrami diﬀerential onX. Thus, we get a morphism V →M (X). If we compose φ ↦→ μφ
with μ ↦→ Xμ,w eg e tam o r p h i s m
V →M g,r
The main result of Teichm¨uller theory (see, e.g., [Gard], Chapter 6) is that this morphism
induces an isomorphism of V onto ˜Mg,r. One advantage of this approach is that it admits
a very satisfying geometric interpretation in terms of a foliation on X induced by φ and
deforming X into Xμφ by deforming a canonical coordinate arising from the foliation. The
main disadvantage of this approach from our point of view, however, is that the morphism
φ ↦→ μ
φ is neither holomorphic nor anti-holomorphic. Thus, it seems hopeless to try to
ﬁnd an algebraic version of Teichm¨uller’s map.
On the other hand, Bers’ approach is as follows. Since we now know that X can
be uniformized by the upper half plane, let vX be the hyperbolic volume element on X
induced by the hyperbolic volume element
vH = dx ∧ dy
y2
on the upper half plane. Let Xc be the conjugate Riemann surface to X.T h a t i s , t h e
underlying topological manifold of Xc is the same as that of X, but the holomorphic
functions on Xc are exactly the anti-holomorphic functions on X. Suppose that φ ∈ Q.
Then by conjugating the “input variable,” we obtain that φ deﬁnes a section φc of ω⊗2
Xc .
Now deﬁne
μφ
def
= −2φc
vXc
Then for some appropriate (see [Gard], pp. 100-104) open set V ⊆ Q,t h i sμφ deﬁnes
a Beltrami diﬀerential on Xc. Integrating, we get a Riemann surface Xc
μ. Then the
assignment φ ↦→ Xc
μ deﬁnes a morphism
V →M c
g,r
where the superscript “c” denotes the conjugate complex manifold. This morphism induces
an isomorphism of V onto ˜Mc
g,r ([Gard], p. 101). The important thing here is that the
correspondence φ ↦→ μφ is holomorphic.S i n c eμ ↦→ Xc
μ is always holomorphic, it thus
15

follows that the isomorphism V ∼= ˜Mc
g,r is biholomorphic. Put another way, we have a
holomorphic embedding
B : ˜Mg,r ↪→ Qc
which is called theBers embedding. This embedding will be central to our entire treatment
of the complex theory, and itsp-adic analogue will be central to our treatment of thep-adic
theory.
Quasidisks and the Bers Embedding
One can also deﬁne the Bers embedding in terms of Bers’ simultaneous uniformization
and Schwarzian derivatives. For details, see [Gard], pp. 100-101. To do this, we ﬁx an
isomorphism of ˜X with H.L e t Hc be the lower half plane. Thus, if H uniformizes X,
then Hc naturally uniformizes Xc. Let Γ be the group of M¨obius transformiations of C
which are the covering transformations forH = ˜X → X. Then we may think of the space
M(Xc) of Beltrami diﬀerentials on Xc as the space of Beltrami diﬀerentials on Hc which
are invariant under Γ. Let μ ∈M (Xc). Let fμ : C → C be the unique quasiconformal
homeomorphism which ﬁxes 0 and 1, goes to inﬁnity at inﬁnity, has Beltrami coeﬃcient μ
on Hc and is conformal onH.L e t Γμ = fμ ◦Γ◦(fμ)−1. Then it follows from the uniqueness
of solutions to the Beltrami equation that Γμ forms a group of M¨obius transformations of
C. Moreover, we have conformal isomorphisms
fμ(Hc)/Γμ ∼= Xc
μ; fμ(H)/Γμ ∼= X
It follows that if we take the Schwarzian derivative of the conformal “quasidisk” embedding
fμ |H : H↪ → C
we get a Γ-invariant quadratic diﬀerential onH, hence a quadratic diﬀerential φ (with at
most simple poles at the punctures) on X. The content of the Lemma of Ahlfors-Weill
([Gard], p. 100) is that the assignment:
Xc
μ ↦→ φ
is equal to Bc : ˜Mc
g,r ↪→ Q. On the one hand, this description of the Bers embedding is
geometrically more satisfying than the deﬁnition given in the previous subsection, but it
has the disadvantage that it obscures the relationship between the hyperbolic and parabolic
cases. So far we have been mainly discussing the hyperbolic case, but we shall discuss the
parabolic case later.
16

The Inﬁnitesimal Form of the Modular Uniformizations
Often it is useful to express these modular uniformizations in their inﬁnitesimal form,
as metrics. On the one hand, the global uniformizations can always be essentially recovered
by integrating the metrics, and on the other hand, metrics, being local in nature, can often
be studied more easily.
In the Teichm¨uller case, if K is deﬁned by
∥φ∥ = K − 1
K +1
then one obtains a distance function on ˜Mg,r,g i v e nb y
d(X,X μφ )= 1
2log(K)
which turns out to be equal to the general hyperbolic distance introduced by Kobayashi
for an arbitrary hyperbolic complex manifold (see [Gard], Chapter 7, for an exposition).
The inﬁnitesimal form of this distance is given by the norm ∥φ∥ =
∫
X |φ| on quadratic
diﬀerentials (see [Royd]).
We shall be more interested in the case of the Bers embedding
B : ˜Mg,r ↪→ Qc
By using the hyperbolic volume formvX on X, we obtain theWeil-Petersson inner product:
⟨φ, ψ⟩
def
=
∫
X
φ · ψ
vX
for φ, ψ∈ Q. It is a result of Weil and Ahlfors that the resulting metric, called the Weil-
Petersson metric on Mg,r,i sK ¨ahler. Moreover, if we diﬀerentiate B,w eg e t ,a tX,am a p
on tangent spaces
dB : Q∨ → Qc
whose inverse is exactly the morphismQc → Q∨ deﬁned by the Weil-Petersson inner prod-
uct. Finally, the coordinates obtained from the Bers embedding are canonical coordinates
for the Weil-Petersson metric ([Royd]). (We shall review the general theory of canonical
coordinates associated to a real analytic K¨ahler metric in §2.)
It turns out that it is precisely the p-adic analogue of the Weil-Petersson metric that
will play a central role in this paper.
17

Coordinates of Degeneration
While the Bers coordinates are useful for understanding what happens in the interior
of Mg,r, they are not so useful for understanding what happens as one goes out to the
boundary, that is, as the Riemann surface degenerates to a Riemann surface with nodes.
To study this sort of degeneration, one ﬁxes a decomposition of the Riemann surface into
“pants,” which are topologically equivalent to an open disk with two smaller disks in the
interior removed. For a detailed description of the theory of pants and the coordinates they
deﬁne, we refer to [Abikoﬀ], Chapter 2. In summary, what happens is the following. Let
X be a hyperbolic Riemann surface (of genus g with r punctures), with a decomposition
into pants. We shall call the curves on X which occur in the boundary of the pants
partition curves. There are exactly 3 g − 3+ r partition curves, α
1,... ,α3g−3+r.W e
assume that this decomposition is “maximal” in the sense that each partition curve is
a simple closed geodesic (in the hyperbolic metric on X). Then it turns out that the
isomorphism class of X as a Riemann surface is completely determined by 3 g − 3+ r
complex numbers ζ
i = li eiθ (i =1 ,... ,3g − 3+ r), one for each partition curve. Basically
li describes the circumference of the partition curve αi, while θi describes the angle of
twisting involved in gluing together the boundary curves of two neighboring pants to form
αi. These coordinates ζi are called theFenchel-Nielsen coordinates ofX. The degeneration
corresponding to pinching αi to a node is given by li → 0. This degeneration respects the
hyperbolic metrics involved: that is, if a family of smooth Xt degenerates to a nodal
Riemann surface Z, then the hyperbolic metrics on the Xt degenerate to the hyperbolic
metric on Z (given by taking the hyperbolic metric on the smooth subsurface of Z which
is the complement of the nodes). Thus, the Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates have the virtue
of admitting a very satisfying diﬀerential-geometric description (as just summarized), but
the disadvantage of not being holomorphic.
On the other hand, one can deﬁne holomorphic coordinates (as in [Wolp]), as follows.
Recall the quasidisk description of the Bers embedding. Thus, we had a μ ∈M (X
c),
and a quasiconformal homeomorphism fμ : C → C, together with a new group of M¨obius
transformations Γμ. Then each αi deﬁnes (by integration) an element Ai ∈ Γμ.U p t o
conjugation, Ai is of the form z ↦→ mi · z for some mi ∈ C with |mi| > 1. This complex
number mi is uniquely deﬁned. Then the coordinates
Xc
μ ↦→ (m1,... ,m3g−3+r)
are holomorphic in μ. In [Wolp], the relationship between these coordinates and the Bers
coordinates is studied. In these coordinates, the degeneration of Xc
μ corresponding to the
case where the partition curve αi is pinched to a node is given by mi → 1. It turns
out that these coordinates are probably the best complex analogue to the “multiplicative
parameters at inﬁnity” that we construct in the p-adic case.
18

The Parabolic Case
So far we have mainly been discussing the case of hyperbolic Riemann surfaces, since
this case is by far the most interesting. However, often it is very diﬃcult to make explicit
computations for hyperbolic Riemann surfaces. Thus, in order to get one’s bearings, it
is sometimes useful to consider the analogous constructions in the parabolic case, where
explicit computations are much easier to carry out. LetX be a parabolic Riemann surface.
Then X is either compact of genus 1, or it is isomorphic to the projective line minus two
points. We shall mainly be interested in the compact case, where there are nontrivial
moduli.
Thus, let X be compact of genus 1. Then one can carry out Teichm¨ uller theory in
this case (as in [Lehto], Chapter V, §6). One can also deﬁne a parabolic analogue of the
Bers embedding, as follows. Namely, we simply copy the formula
μ
φ
def
= −2φc
vXc
of the hyperbolic case, except that we take vXc to be the parabolic volume element (as
opposed to the hyperbolic volume element) on Xc,w i t h
∫
Xc vXc = 1. Then one sees (as
in [Lehto], p. 220) that one obtains a holomorphic embedding
B1,0 : ˜M1,0 ↪→ Qc
whose image is an open diskD ⊆ Qc of some radius. One can also deﬁne a Weil-Petersson
metric on M1,0 by simply replacing the hyperbolic volume element used before by the
parabolic volume element. A simple calculation then reveals that one obtains the standard
hyperbolic metric on the open disk D. In particular, (just as in the hyperbolic case), the
standard coordinate on D is normal at 0 for the Weil-Petersson metric.
One thing that is interesting about this parabolic case is that even though the complex
analytic stacks M
1,0 and M1,1 are isomorphic, the “Bers theory” diﬀers substantially in
the two cases. For instance, the Bers embedding of ˜M1,1 is far from being an open disk.
In fact, (as the author was told by C. McMullen) the boundary of this hyperbolic Bers
embedding has lots of cusps. A computer-generated illustration of this boundary appears in
[McM]. Also, it is not diﬃcult to show that the Weil-Petersson metrics are quite diﬀerent.
This contrasts considerably with the “Teichm¨uller theory” of M
1,0 and M1,1: Indeed,
since Teichm¨uller’s metric always coincides with Kobayashi’s intrinsic hyperbolic metric,
it follows that the Teichm¨uller metrics of M1,0 and M1,1 coincide.
Real Curves
A Riemann surfaceX of ﬁnite type is calledrealif X ∼= Xc. In other words, this means
that the C-valued point deﬁned by X in the algebraic stack ( Mg,r)R (over Spec(R)) is,
19

in fact, deﬁned over R (up to perhaps reordering the marked points). Various interesting
properties of real Riemann surfaces (related to uniformization theory) are studied in [Falt2].
Many of these properties are obtained by looking at various one-dimensional real analytic
submanifolds of a real X.
From our point of view, however, the notable fact about real hyperbolic Riemann
surfaces X is the following. Let φ : X ∼= X
c be a holomorphic isomorphism. For simplicity,
suppose that there exists a point x ∈ X such that φ(x)= xc,a n dt h a tφc ◦φ =i dX. Fix
an isomorphism ˜X ∼= H. This induces an isomorphism ˜Xc ∼= Hc. On the other hand, φ
induces a holomorphic isomorphism ˜φ : H → Hc.L e t C : Hc → H be the conjugation
map. Let ψ = C ◦ ˜φ.T h u s ,ψ is an anti-holomorphic automorphism of H.N o w l e t
ΠC = π1(X,x ). Since Xc has the same underlying topological space as X,w eh a v e
ΠC = π1(Xc,xc). Thus, φ induces an automorphism φΠ of ΠC of degree 2. Let ΠR be the
extension
1 → ΠC → ΠR → Gal(C/R) → 1
which is the crossed product of ΠC with Gal(C/R) given by letting the nontrivial element
of Gal(C/R) act on ΠC by means of φΠ. Now let us consider the Lie group
G(R)
def
= {M ∈ GL2(R)| det(M)= ±1}/{±1}
Thus, PSL2(R) ⊆ G(R) ⊆ GL±
2 (R), so we can write
ρC :Π C → GL±
2 (R)
for the canonical representation of X (uniformized by the upper half plane H). Note that
the full group GL±
2 (R) acts on the upper half plane as follows: ifA =
( ab
cd
)
∈ GL±
2 (R),
we let
A(z)= aw + b
cw + d
where w = z (respectively, w = z)i fd e t (A) is positive (respectively, negative). Thus,
the map deﬁned by A is a holomorphic (respectively, anti-holomorphic) automorphism
of H if det(A) is positive (respectively, negative). In particular, the anti-holomorphic
automorphism ψ : H → H deﬁnes an element (which by abuse of notation we call) ψ ∈
G(R). Now note that if γ ∈ ΠC,t h e nψ · ρ(γ) · ψ−1 = ρ(φΠ(γ)). Thus, by mapping the
nontrivial element of Gal(C/R) in the crossed product deﬁnition of Π R to ψ, we see that
we obtain a natural homomorphism
ρR :Π R → GL±
2 (R)
20

which extends ρC and is such that the composite with the determinant det : GL ±
2 (R) →
R× is trivial on Π C and equal to the sign representation on Gal( C/R). It is this repre-
sentation ρR that will be relevant to our discussion of the p-adic case.
§2. Translation into the p-adic Case
In this Section, we discuss the dictionary for translating the complex analytic theory
of §1i n t ot h ep-adic results discussed in §0. Undoubtedly, the most fundamental tool,
which is, in fact, of an algebraic, not an arithmetic nature, is the systematic use of the
indigenous bundles of [Gunning]. This enables one to get rid of the upper half plane, and
thus to bring uniformization theory into a somewhat more algebraic setting. In any sort
of nontrivial arithmetic theory of this nature, however, algebraic manipulations alone can
never be enough. Thus, the fundamental arithmetic observation is the following:
K¨ahler metrics in the complex case correspond to Frobenius actions in
the p-adic case.
Since one typically gets a natural Frobenius action for free modulo p, a Frobenius action
typically means a canonical lifting of the natural Frobenius action modulo p.I n f a c t ,
in some sense, if one sorts through the complex analytic theory reviewed §1, one can
essentially distill everything down to two objects, both of which happen to be K¨ ahler
metrics:
(1) the hyperbolic metric on a hyperbolic Riemann surface (which encodes
the upper half plane uniformization); and
(2) the Weil-Petersson metric on the moduli space (which encodes the Bers
uniformization).
Moreover, these two metrics are related to each other in the sense that the latter is essen-
tially the push-forward of the former. In a similar way, the p-adic theory revolves around
two fundamental Frobenius liftings:
(1) the canonical Frobenius lifting on a canonical hyperbolic curve; and
(2) the canonical Frobenius lifting on a certain stack which is ´ etale over
the moduli stack.
The goal of this Section is to explain this analogy in greater detail.
21

Gunning’s Theory of Indigenous Bundles
Let X be a compact hyperbolic Riemann surface. Let H → X be its uniformization
by the upper half plane. Then by considering the covering transformations ofH → X,w e
get a homomorphism (unique up to conjugation)
ρ: π1(X) → Aut(H) ⊆ PSL2(R)
which we call the canonical representation of X. If we regard ρ as deﬁning a morphism
into PSL2(C), then we obtain (in the usual fashion), a local system of P1-bundles on X,
which thus gives us a holomorphic P1-bundle with connection (P, ∇P )o n X. By Serre’s
GAGA, (P, ∇P ) is necessarily algebraic. It turns out that P is always isomorphic to a
certain P1-bundle of jets (which is also entirely algebraic). Thus, the upper half plane
uniformization may be thought of as just being a special choice of connection ∇P .Ap a i r
“like” (P, ∇P ) (satisfying certain technical properties discussed in Chapter I, §2) is called
an indigenous bundle . By working with log structures, one can also deﬁne indigenous
bundles in a natural way for smooth X with punctures, as well as for nodal X.
As emphasized earlier, the point of dealing with indigenous bundles is that they allow
one to translate the upper half plane uniformization into the purely algebraic information
of a connection on P. Of course, how one chooses this particular special connection on P
is very nontrivial arithmetic issue. We shall call the pair (P, ∇P ) consisting of P equipped
with this particular connection the canonical indigenous bundle on X. Universally, over
the moduli stack Mg,r (of stable r-pointed curves of genus g over C), the space of all
indigenous bundles forms a holomorphic torsor
Sg,r → Mg,r
over the logarithmic cotangent bundle Ω log
Mg,r /C of Mg,r. In the holomorphic category,
we shall see (in Chapter I, §3) that this torsor is highly nontrivial. In the real analytic
category, however, the canonical indigenous bundle determines a trivializing section
sH : Sg,r → Mg,r
of this torsor.
In fact, indigenous bundles also allow us to translate such diﬀerential-geometric in-
formation as the hyperbolic geometry of X into algebraic terms. For instance, consider
the degeneration of Riemann surfaces from the point of view of hyperbolic geometry. As
reviewed in §1, this may be thought of in terms of certain geodesic partition curves whose
lengths go to zero as a family of smooth Xt degenerates to a nodal Riemann surface Z.
From the complex theory, we know that the hyperbolic metric on Xt degenerates to the
hyperbolic metric on Z. Using indigenous bundles, we can translate this into a more al-
gebraic statement as follows: We deﬁne the canonical indigenous bundle on Z to be the
22

indigenous bundle obtained by gluing together the canonical indigenous bundles of the
pointed Riemann surfaces occurring in the normalization ofZ. Then the statement is that
as Xt degenerates to Z, the canonical indigenous bundle on Xt degenerates to the canon-
ical indigenous bundle on Z. The statement that the lengths of the partition geodesics
go to zero then takes the form that the monodromy of the limit indigenous bundle of the
canonical indigenous bundles of the X
t’s is nilpotent at the nodes.
The Canonical Coordinates Associated to a K¨ahler Metric
In this subsection we discuss how a K¨ahler metric on a complex manifold can be used to
deﬁne canonical aﬃne, holomorphic coordinates on the manifold locally in a neighborhood
of a given point. We believe that what is discussed here is well-known, but our point of
view is somewhat diﬀerent from that usually taken in the literature.
Let M be a smooth complex manifold of complex dimensionm. The complex analytic
structure on M deﬁnes, in particular, a real analytic structure on M.L e t μ be a real
analytic (1,1)-form on M that deﬁnes a K¨ahler metric on M.I np a r t i c u l a r ,μ is a closed
diﬀerential form. Let M
c be the conjugate complex manifold toM: that is to say, we take
Mc to be that complex manifold which has the same underlying real analytic manifold
structure as M, but whose holomorphic functions are the anti-holomorphic functions of
M. Let us ﬁx a point e ∈ M.L e t N be the germ of a complex manifold obtained by
localizing the complex manifold Mc × M at (e, e) ∈ Mc × M (where this last expression
makes sense since Mc has the same underlying set as M). Let Ωhol (respectively, Ωant)b e
the holomorphic vector bundle onN obtained by pulling back the bundle ΩM (respectively,
ΩMc ) of holomorphic diﬀerentials on M (respectively, Mc)t o Mc × M via the projection
Mc × M → M (respectively, Mc × M → Mc), and then restricting to N.T h u s , i n
s u m m a r y ,w eh a v ea2m-dimensional germ of a complex manifold N, together with two
m-dimensional holomorphic vector bundles (locally free sheaves) Ωhol and Ωant on N.
Note that locally at e ∈ M, the fact that μ is real analytic means that we can write
μ as a convergent power series in holomorphic and anti-holomorphic local coordinates at
e. In other words, if we restrict μ to N, we may regard μ|N as deﬁning a holomorphic
section of Ωhol ⊗ON Ωant (where ON is the sheaf of holomorphic functions on N). Let dhol
(respectively, dant) be the exterior derivative on N with respect to the variables coming
from M (respectively, Mc). Note that since Ωhol is constructed via pull-back from M,w e
can apply dant to sections of Ωhol. We thus obtain a sort of de Rham complex with respect
to dant:
0 −→ Ωhol dant
−→ Ωhol ⊗ON Ωant dant
−→ Ωhol ⊗ON (∧2Ωant)
dant
−→ ...
Relative to this complex, the section μ|N of Ωhol ⊗ Ωant satisﬁes dant μ|N =0( s i n c eμ is a
closed form). It thus follows from the Poincar´e Lemma that there exists a (holomorphic)
section α of Ωhol that vanishes at (e, e) ∈ N and satisﬁes dant α = μ|N .L e t Me be the
germ of a complex manifold obtained by localizing M at e ∈ M.L e t
23

ι: Mc
e ↪→ N
be the inclusion induced by the mapMc → Mc ×M that takesf ∈ Mc to (f,e ) ∈ Mc ×M.
Then ι∗(α) deﬁnes a holomorphic morphism β : Mc
e → ΩM,e,w h e r eΩM,e is the aﬃne
complex analytic space deﬁned by the cotangent space of M at e. Note, moreover, that
although α (as chosen above) is not unique, β is nonetheless independent of the choice
of α.M o r e o v e r ,β is an immersion: Indeed, to see this, it suﬃces to check that the map
induced by β on tangent spaces is an isomorphism, but this follows from the fact that
dant α = μ|N , and the fact that the Hermitian form deﬁned by μ is nondegenerate.
In summary, we see that from the K¨ahler metric μ, we obtain a canonical holomorphic
local aﬃne uniformization
βc : Me ↪→ Ωc
M,e
Pulling back the standard aﬃne coordinates on Ω c
M,e gives us a canonical collection of
holomorphic coordinates on Me.
Deﬁnition 2.1. We shall refer to these coordinates as the canonical holomorphic local
coordinates of the K¨ahler manifold (M,μ) at e. We shall refer to βc as the canonical local
aﬃne uniformization of the K¨ahler manifold (M,μ) at e.
Now let us consider some basic well-known examples:
Example 1. Let M = {z ∈ C|| z| < 1}, with the standard hyperbolic metric 2dz∧dz√
1−(z·z)
.
Then z is a canonical coordinate at 0. Indeed, to see this it suﬃces to note thatdhol(z·dz)=
dz ∧dz, which is equal to the metric modulo the ideal generated byz in ON . Note that by
the K¨obe uniformization theorem, this example essentially covers all hyperbolic Riemann
surfaces.
Example 2. Let M be the Teichm¨uller space of Riemann surfaces of genus g with r
punctures, where 2g − 2+ r ≥ 1. Then as stated earlier, it is known ([Royd]) that the
coordinates arising from the Bers embedding are canonical coordinates with respect to the
Weil-Petersson metric onM. In fact, in this case, by Theorem 2.3 (proven below) the real
analytic section sH deﬁned by the canonical indigenous bundle essentially already serves
as an “α” in the above discussion. Thus, in a very real sense, thesection sH already is the
Bers embedding.
24

The Weil-Petersson Metric from the Point of View of Indigenous Bundles
Let X be a compact hyperbolic Riemann surface. Let ( π : P → X, ∇P )b et h e
canonical indigenous bundle on X. Let Ad( P)= π∗τP/X be the push-forward of the
relative tangent bundle of π. Thus, Ad( P) is a rank 3 vector bundle on X, equipped
with a simple Lie algebra structure, hence with a nondegenerate Killing form < −, − >:
Ad(P) ⊗OX Ad(P) →O X.M o r e o v e r ,∇P induces a connection ∇Ad on Ad(P). Moreover,
as an indigenous bundle, Ad( P) comes equipped with a section σ : X → P (the “Hodge
section”) which deﬁnes a Hodge ﬁltration F ·(Ad(P)) on Ad(P). (See Chapter I for more
details.) At any rate, we can take the ﬁrst de Rham cohomologyH1
DR(Ad(P), ∇Ad) module
of (Ad(P), ∇Ad). The Hodge ﬁltration on Ad( P) then deﬁnes a Hodge ﬁltration on the de
Rham cohomology, hence an exact sequence:
0 → H0(X,ω ⊗2
X ) → H1
DR(Ad(P), ∇Ad) → H1(X,τX) → 0
On the other hand, recall the representation that we used to deﬁne (P, ∇P ):
ρ: π1(X) → Aut(H) ⊆ PSL2(R)
Let Ad(VR)d e n o t et h eπ1(X)-module obtained by letting π1(X) act on the Lie algebra
sl2(R) by applying ρand then conjugating matrices. Let Ad(VC)
def
=A d (VR) ⊗R C.T h e n
(it is elementary that) we have a “comparison theorem” that gives a natural isomorphism
between the de Rham cohomology module just considered and the group cohomology of
Ad(V
C):
H1
DR(Ad(P), ∇Ad) ∼= H1(π1(X),Ad(VC))
On the other hand, we also have:
H1(π1(X),Ad(VC)) ∼= H1(π1(X),Ad(VR)) ⊗R C
which, combined with the above comparison theorem, thus gives a real structure on
H1
DR(Ad(P), ∇Ad). One way to express this real structure is as an R-linear conjugation
morphism (read: “Frobenius action”) cDR : H1
DR(Ad(P), ∇Ad) → H1
DR(Ad(P), ∇Ad).
Now let us consider the relationship between cDR and the Hodge ﬁltration. If we
compose the natural inclusion H0(X,ω ⊗2
X ) ↪→ H1
DR(Ad(P), ∇Ad)w i t hcDR followed by the
natural projection H1
DR(Ad(P), ∇Ad) → H1(X,τX), we obtain a C-bilinear form
β : H0(X,ω ⊗2) ⊗C H0(X,ω ⊗2)c → C
(where the superscript “ c” stands for the complex conjugateC-vector space).
25

Proposition 2.2. The form β is precisely the Weil-Petersson metric on quadratic diﬀer-
entials deﬁned in §1 by means of integration. In particular, β is nondegenerate.
Proof. In order to obtain β, we implicitly used the special case of Serre duality given by
H1(X,τX) ∼= H0(X,ω ⊗2
X ). But in the complex analytic context, the pairing that deﬁnes
this sort of duality is given by integrating the product of ((0,1)− and (1,0)−)f o r m s .T h e
volume form vX appears for the sake of deﬁning the duality between ωX and ωX. With
these remarks, the claim of the Lemma becomes a tautology. ⃝
Now let us recall the real analytic section sH : Mg,r → Sg,r.S i n c eSg,r → Mg,r is a
holomorphic torsor, we may form∂sH, which gives a section of Ωlog
Mg,r /C ⊗Ω
log
Mg,r /C.O n t h e
other hand, the Weil-Petersson metric also deﬁnes a section μWP of Ωlog
Mg,r /C ⊗ Ω
log
Mg,r /C.
Now we have the following result (stated in [ZT], but from a somewhat diﬀerent point of
view):
Theorem 2.3. The form ∂sH is equal to μWP.
Proof. By introducing log structures, one can handle the general case; here, for simplicity,
we restrict our attention to the case of smooth compact Riemann surfaces. Let us consider
the composite of the natural inclusionH
0(X,ω ⊗2
X ) ↪→ H1
DR(Ad(P), ∇Ad)w i t hcDR followed
by the natural projectionH1
DR(Ad(P), ∇Ad) → H1(X,τX); this composite gives aC-linear
morphism:
H0(X,ω ⊗2
X ) → H1(X,τX)c
which is invertible by Lemma 2.2. Taking its inverse, and dualizing, we obtain an element
δ∈ H0(X,ω ⊗2
X ) ⊗C H0(X,ω ⊗2
X )c
On the other hand, sorting through the deﬁnitions, it is a tautology in linear algebra that
the value of ∂sH at the point [X] ∈M g is given by δ. But, combining this with Lemma
2.2, we see that we have proven the Theorem. ⃝
The important point here is that this Theorem shows that:
The Weil-Petersson metric, and hence the Bers embedding, is obtained
precisely by considering the extent to which “Frobenius” – i.e., complex
conjugation – is compatible with the canonical indigenous bundle section
s
H.
26

Stated in this way, the classical complex theory becomes all the more formally analogous
to the p-adic theory to be discussed in this paper.
The Philosophy of K¨ahler Metrics as Frobenius Liftings
Before going into a detailed account of the correspondence between complex and p-
adic results, we pause to explain some of the motivation for considering K¨ahler metrics as
Frobenius liftings. Let S be a smooth p-adic formal scheme overZp. A Frobenius lifting on
S is a morphism Φ : S → S whose reduction modulo p is equal to the Frobenius morphism
in characteristicp. Then the main point of the analogy is that just as (real analytic) K¨ahler
metrics deﬁne canonical coordinates (as discussed above), Frobenius liftings Φ : S → S
(that satisfy a certain technical condition called ordinariness – see Chapter III, §1f o r
details) also deﬁne canonical coordinates, as follows:
The most basic example of an ordinary Frobenius lifting is the case when S is the
p-adic completion of Zp[T,T −1]( w h e r eT is an indeterminate), and Φ −1(T)= Tp.T h e n
the theory of ordinary Frobenius liftings (Chapter III,§1) states that by means of a certain
“integration” procedure, every ordinary Frobenius lifting on an arbitraryS becomes (after
completing at a point of S) isomorphic to a product of copies of this basic example. This
“integration procedure” is thus analogous to the integration procedure just reviewed which
allowed us to construct canonical coordinates associated to real analytic K¨ahler metrics.
The Dictionary
The fundamental “nuts and bolts” of the complex theory lies in the Beltrami equa-
tion. Suppose that we think of the Beltrami equation not as a diﬀerential equation whose
unknown is the quasiconformal function f
μ, but instead as an equation whose unknown
is the conformal quasidisk embedding function fμ |H (in the discussion of quasidisks). A
quasidisk embedding of the universal covering space of a hyperbolic Riemann surface X
deﬁnes an indigenous bundle ( P, ∇P )μ on X in a natural way. Thus, from this point of
view, we can think of the Beltrami equation as an equation whose unknown is ( P, ∇P )μ.
Moreover, the Beltrami coeﬃcient μ deﬁnes the “shearing” or distortion factor between
z and z. Thus, in summary, we may regard the Beltrami equation as an equation in the
unknown (P, ∇P )μ in terms of the distortion factor (eﬀected by the quasidisk embedding
fμ |H) between z and its “Frobenius conjugate” z.
On the other hand, the “nuts and bolts” of the p-adic theory lies in the study of the
Verschiebung on indigenous bundles, which occupies most of Chapter II. As a function
on the indigenous bundles of a hyperbolic curve in characteristic p, the Verschiebung –
which is essentially the determinant of the p-curvature – measures the distortion factor
between applying Frobenius to an inﬁnitesimal on the curve and applying Frobenius to an
inﬁnitesimal motion in the (“quasidisk”) uniformization deﬁned by the indigenous bundle.
Thus, for instance, when the p-curvature is nilpotent, there is no distortion factor, and so
the indigenous bundle provides the “right” uniformization for the curve. In this sense, we
27

feel that there is an analogy between the Beltrami equation in the complex theory and the
Verschiebung on indigenous bundles in the p-adic theory.
Relative to this analogy, the fundamental existence and uniqueness theorem for solu-
tions to the Beltrami equation becomes the result (in Chapter II) that the Verschiebung on
indigenous bundles is ﬁnite and ﬂat. Since in the p-adic case, its degree is not one, we only
have uniqueness up to a ﬁnite number of possibilities. This is why we get several distinct
“quasiconformal equivalence classes” in the p-adic case. Moreover, the important integral
operator “T” – i.e., the parametrix to
∂ – which gives the ﬁrst term in the series expansion
for fμ may be regarded as having its analogue in the p-adic theory in the inﬁnitesimal
Verschiebung, which plays an important role throughout the paper.
More obvious is the analogy between the canonical representation ρC : π1(X) →
PSL2(R) of a hyperbolic Riemann surface (arising from the upper half plane uniformiza-
tion), and the canonical representation ρ∞ :Π ∞ → GL±
2 (Zp) of an ordinary p-adic curve
(in Theorem 0.4). Of course in the p-adic case, Π ∞ has a substantial arithmetic part in
addition to its geometric part. Although generally in the complex case, there is not much
of a Galois group to work with, at least for real curves, we saw at the end of §1, that one
does get a natural representation ρ
R of the full “arithmetic fundamental group” Π R into
GL±
2 (R). Moreover, our approach to constructing ρ∞ in the p-adic case is very much akin
to Bers’ approach to constructing ρC in the complex case: Namely, if one traces through
the proof (which lies in Chapters II through V), one sees that eﬀectively what we are doing
is noting that the result is true for totally degenerate curves, and then transporting this
result over the rest of the moduli stack of ordinary curves.
Next let us consider metrics and geometry. As we stated earlier, in some sense,
one can summarize the entire complex theory by saying: We start with the hyperbolic
(K¨ahler) metric on a hyperbolic curve, deﬁne the Weil-Petersson (K¨ahler) metric on the
moduli stack precisely so as to be compatible with the hyperbolic metric on the curves
being parametrized; then our holomorphic uniformizations – i.e., both the upper half plane
uniformization of the hyperbolic curve and the Bers uniformization of the moduli stack
– are obtained by “integrating” the respective metrics. Similarly, the fundamental result
in the p-adic theory – namely, Theorem 0.1 – is a result about the existence of certain
Frobenius liftings on the universal hyperbolic curve and its moduli stack which are uniquely
characterized by the fact that they are compatible with each other. Here the compatibility
is expressed through the tool of the canonical indigenous bundle. Then, by “integrating”
these Frobenius actions, we obtain canonical ( p-adically holomorphic) coordinates (as in
Corollary 0.2) on C
ord and N
ord
g,r . This particular analogy lies at the heart of this work.
The Bers coordinates and the coordinates of Chapter III, Theorem 2.4, are appropriate
in the locus Mg,r of smooth curves. For totally degenerate curves, one has multiplicative
parameters (Chapter III, Deﬁnition 2.7) which we believe are analogous to the holomorphic
coordinates of degeneration of [Wolp], reviewed in§1. For instance, both sets of parameters
are holomorphic and naturally indexed by the nodes of the totally degenerate curve.
For elliptic curves – regardedparabolically– one has, on the one hand, the well-known
theory of the hyperbolic upper half plane, or unit disk, in the complex case, and Serre-
28

Tate theory in the p-adic case. It is interesting to note that at both types of primes
(complex and p-adic), the parabolic theory may be obtained in a very precise sense as
the parabolic specializations, respectively, of Bers’ theory and of the hyperbolic p-adic
theory developed in this paper. In fact, this is one of our reasons for feeling that the
canonical p-adic coordinates of Corollary 0.2 are the p-adic analogue, not of Teichm¨uller’s
coordinates, but of Bers’: Namely, in addition to the fact that Teichm¨uller’s coordinates are
not holomorphic, whereas Bers’ are, Teichm¨uller obtainsthe same coordinatesfor 1-pointed
curves of genus 1 and parabolic elliptic curves. On the other hand, it is well-known that
Bers’ coordinates are very diﬀerent for 1-pointed curves of genus 1 and parabolic elliptic
curves, which is consistent with the fact that the canonical coordinates of Corollary 0.2
are also very diﬀerent for 1-pointed curves of genus 1 and parabolic elliptic curves.
Loose Ends
We close by saying that although, as described above, there are (what the author
believes to be) very strong analogies between Bers’ complex theory and the p-adic theory
presented here, the picture is by no means complete. For instance, one fundamental fact
in the complex case is that all r-pointed smooth curves of genus g are quasiconformally
equivalent, whereas in the p-adic case, the theory behaves as though there are several
diﬀerent quasiconformal equivalence classes that are permuted around to each other by a
certain monodromy action in such a way that there seems to be no one quasiconformal
equivalence class “which is better than the others.” Ideally, one would like to have a much
more complete understanding of this phenomenon. In particular, one would like to know
precisely how many quasiconformal equivalence classes there are (at least generically), as
well as a more explicit description of the set of such classes.
Also, I still do not understand what the complex, or global, analogue of a “canoni-
cal p-adic curve” is. For ordinary elliptic curves, since Serre-Tate canonical liftings have
complex multiplication, one can ask what the hyperbolic analogue of having complex mul-
tiplication is. Since having complex multiplication for an elliptic curve means having lots
of isogenies, it is natural to ask if the proper hyperbolic analogue is having lots of cor-
respondences, which are a sort of higher genus version of isogenies. If a hyperbolic curve
does have a lot of correspondences, then one knows ([Marg]) that the image of its canonical
representation is arithmetic. In Chapter IV, we prove that a canonical curve has lots of
“pseudo-correspondences,” but unfortunately, at the time of writing, I do not see how to
make these pseudo-correspondences into genuine correspondences, so that one could apply
Margulis’ result. Another issue that arises in this connection is the question of whether one
can characterize “hyperbolic curves with complex multiplication” – whatever the correct
deﬁnition should be for this term – in terms of the Bers coordinates.
Finally, as the title implies, the present work deals exclusively with the case ofordinary
curves. In a complete theory, one would like to know what happens when one has a
nilpotent indigenous bundle which is not ordinary.
29

At any rate, in summary, with respect to these three issues of quasiconformal equiv-
alence classes, canonical curves, and non-ordinary curves, much work remains to be done.
We hope to be able to address these issues in future papers.
30

Chapter I: Crystalline Projective Structures
§0. Introduction
The purpose of this Chapter is to study the algebraic analogue of projective structures
on a Riemann surface. In particular, we prove many of the analogues of results of [Gunning]
in a purely algebraic framework, often making use of the crystalline site where complex
analytically one would restrict to a simply connected neighborhood on which one can
integrate. Unlike Gunning, we make systematic use of the log structures of [Kato], which
enable us to work with a very general sort of “log-curve,” that is, we can handle the case
of curves with marked points, as well as singular nodal curves on an equal footing to the
smooth case.
In §1, we discuss the notion of a Schwarz structure, which is the algebraic analogue of
[Gunning]’s projective structures. We relate Schwarz structures to projective bundles with
connections as well as to square diﬀerentials, and we show that Schwarz structures naturally
give rise to a Schwarzian derivative. (Moreover, in the Appendix to this Chapter, we show
that for P
1, this abstract notion of a Schwarzian derivative essentially coincides with the
classical Schwarzian derivative.) The characterizing feature of §1i st h a te v e r y t h i n gt a k e s
place locally on the curve in question. In §2, we discuss indigenous bundles (the direct
algebraic analogue of [Gunning]’s indigenous bundles). What distinguishes §2f r o m§1i s
that in §2, we work mainly over stable curves, and thus global issues on the curve come
into play. In §2, we are still working locally, however, on the base.I n §3, we perform
various intersection theory calculations that allow us to prove that in most cases, there
do exist any canonical indigenous bundles on the universal smooth curve over a moduli
stack. Thus, in §3, we are concerned with issues that are global not only on the curve, but
also on the base. It should be said that all the material in this Chapter is, in some sense,
“well-known,” but I do not know of any modern reference that does things from this point
of view. In particular, all the references that I know of (with the exception of [Ih], which
is algebraic, but somewhat diﬀerent in point of view) discuss things only in the complex
analytic case, and often work with “ h
αβ ’s” (i.e., cocycle classes) rather than with objects
that have an intrinsic meaning.
§1. Schwarz Structures
In this Section, we introduce the crystalline analogue of what Gunning calls “projective
structures on a Riemann surface.” (We shall call them Schwarz structures (after the
Schwarzian derivative) to distinguish them from the analytic notion.) We begin by letting
S be a connected noetherian scheme. Often, we shall prove results about arbitrary stable
curves by working on various compactiﬁed moduli stacks. Thus, even if one is ultimately
interested only in smooth curves, for certain proofs, we shall see that it is useful to develop
31

the machinery for arbitrary stable curves. To deal with singular curves, we shall use the
theory of log schemes of [Kato]. Thus, we assume that S has a given ﬁne ([Kato], §2) log
structure, and denote the resulting log scheme by Slog.
Notation and Basic Deﬁnitions
Deﬁnition 1.1. Let f
log : Ulog → Slog be a morphism of log schemes whose underlying
morphism of schemes f : U → S is of ﬁnite type, ﬂat and of relative dimension one. Then
we shall say that flog is locally stable of dimension one if, for every point u ∈ U,t h e r e
exist ´etale morphisms T → S and V → U ×S T, together with v ∈ V mapping to u ∈ U
such that when we pull-back the log structure on S (respectively, U)t o T (respectively,
V ) to obtain log schemes V log and Tlog, one of the following holds:
(1) V → T is smooth, and V log = V ×T Tlog (where V and T denote the
log schemes with trivial log structure); or
(2) V → T is smooth, and there exists a section s : T → V such that if we
denote by V s the log scheme deﬁned by the relative divisor Im(s)o n V ,
then V log = V s ×T Tlog;o r
(3) let Y =S p e c (Z[t]); X = Y [x, y]/(xy − t)( w h e r ex, y,a n dt are indeter-
minates) and endow Y (respectively, X) with the log structure arising
from the divisor t = 0 (respectively, xy = 0), so we get a morphism
Xlog → Y log of log schemes; then there exists a morphism of log schemes
Tlog → Y log, together with a morphism ζlog : V log → Tlog ×Y log Xlog
such that the underlying scheme morphism ζ of ζlog is ´etale, and the
log structure of V log on V is the pull-back via ζ of the log structure on
Tlog ×Y log Xlog.
In case (1) (respectively, (2); (3)), we shall say thatf is smooth and unmarked(respectively,
marked; singular)a t u.
Note that if flog : Ulog → Slog is locally stable of dimension one, then it is always log
smooth ([Kato], §3). Also, note that by ´etale descent, the images in U of all the sections
s as in Case (2) above form a divisor in U which is ´etale over S. We shall refer to this
divisor as the divisor of marked points in U.
Now let us suppose that there exists an odd primep which is nilpotent on S.W ea l s o
suppose that we are given a closed subscheme S0 = V (I) ⊆ S, where the sheaf of ideals
I has a divided power structure γ. We denote the log scheme S0 ×S Slog (where S0 and
S denote the log schemes which are the respective schemes endowed with the trivial log
structure) by Slog
0 .L e t flog : Ulog → Slog be locally stable of dimension one. Then we
shall call a section of DΔ (Ulog ×Slog Ulog) (the PD-envelope of the diagonal, as in [Kato],
32

§5) a bianalytic function over Ulog. Note that the bianalytic functions form a sheaf, which
we denote OUbi ,o nt h e´etale site of U.L e t OU denote the sheaf on the ´etale site of U
given by considering ordinary functions. Then the two projections U ×S U → U give rise
to injections iL : OU →O Ubi and iR : OU →O Ubi whose images we shall call the left-sided
(respectively, right-sided) bianalytic functions on Ulog. We shall also refer to right-sided
bianalytic functions as constant bianalytic functions,o r bianalytic constants. We denote
tensor products of an OU -module F over OU with OUbi via iL (respectively, iR)b yw r i t i n g
F on the left (respectively, right). Finally, we have a multiplication morphismμ : OUbi →
OU . We denote the ideal subsheaf of OUbi which is the kernel of μ by J .W e s h a l l s a y
that a bianalytic function f over some ´etale V → U is a bianalytic uniformizer on V if f
is, in fact, a section of J which generates the line bundle J /J[2] ∼= ωUlog/Slog as an OU -
module. Let OˆUbi be the completion of OUbi with respect to the divided powers J[i],a n d
let ˆJ⊆ O ˆUbi be the closure of J in OˆUbi . We shall call sections ofOˆUbi biformal functions,
and use similar terminology for biformal functions as we do for bianalytic functions.
Occasionally, we shall also need to make use of trianalytic (respectively, triformal)
functions, i.e., sections of DΔ (Ulog ×Slog Ulog ×Slog Ulog) (respectively, its completion with
respect to the divided powers of the diagonal ideal). We denote the sheaf of trianalytic
functions (respectively, triformal) on the ´etale site of U by O
Utr (respectively, OˆUtr ), and
we have left, right, and middle injections j1,j2,j3 : OU →O Utr , as well as injections
j12,j23,j13 : OUbi →O Utr . We shall apply similar terminology and notation to trianalytic
or triformal functions to that applied already to bianalytic functions. In particular, we
shall call trianalytic functions that are in the image of j23 trianalytic constants.
Deﬁnition 1.2. Let S⊆O ˆUbi be a subsheaf in the category of sets. We shall call S a
Schwarz (respectively, pre-Schwarz) structure on Ulog if ´etale locally on U (i.e., for some
´etale cover V → U), S has the following form: there exists some biformal uniformizer
z ∈ Γ(V, S) such that for every ´etale W → V , and every section f ∈ Γ(W, OˆUbi ), then
f ∈ Γ(W, S) if and only if (respectively, implies that)f can be written ´etale locally (on W)
in the form (az + b)/(cz + d), where a, b, c, dare biformal constants and d is invertible.
It is clear that if S⊆O ˆUbi is a pre-Schwarz structure on Ulog,t h e nS is contained in a
unique Schwarz structure Sa ⊆O ˆUbi on Ulog, which we refer to as the Schwarz structure
associated to S.I f S is a Schwarz structure, then we shall denote byS× ⊆S (respectively,
LS) the subsheaf consisting locally of functions of the form (az+b)/(cz+d), where: (1) z is
a biformal uniformizer belonging to S;( 2 )d is invertible; and (3)
( ab
cd
)
is an invertible
matrix of biformal constants (respectively, b =0 ) . W el e tL×
S = LS
⋂ S×.T h u sS×, LS,
and L×
S are all pre-Schwarz structures. We shall call L×
S (respectively, LS) the sheaf of
biformal uniformizers (respectively, pseudo-uniformizers)o f S.
Let G → U be the group scheme PGL2,a n dl e tB ⊆ G be the subgroup scheme which
is the standard Borel subgroup of PGL2, i.e., the image of the lower triangular matrices.
33

First Properties of Schwarz Structures
Proposition 1.3. The subsheaf L×
S ⊆S consisting of biformal uniformizers of S forms a
B-torsor BS → U.
Proof. This follows immediately from the deﬁnition of a Schwarz structure. The action of
B is given by associating to a biformal uniformizer z and a matrix
( a 0
cd
)
(where a, c, d
are biformal constants, and a, d are invertible) the biformal uniformizer az/(cz + d). ⃝
Note that every B-torsor T → U naturally deﬁnes a P1-bundle with a given section (by
taking the quotient of P1 ×U T modulo the diagonal action of B,w h e r eB acts on P1 by
means of aﬃne transformations that ﬁx zero; the section is the image of the zero section
of P
1). We shall refer to the P1-bundle PS → U associated to BS → U as the P1-bundle
associated to the Schwarz structure S. We denote by σS : U → PS the natural section
(arising from the fact that the structure group is B rather than G).
Proposition 1.4. Let S be a Schwarz structure on Ulog.T h e nPS ∼= P(J /J[3]),a n d
σ∗
SτPS /U ∼= (J /J[2])∨ ∼= τUlog/Slog . In particular, if U → S is proper, then the height of
σS with respect to τPS /U is −deg(ωUlog/Slog ).
Proof. One sees by construction (e.g., by writing out transition functions) that the sheaf of
nonzero relative rational functions of relative degree one (as in [EGA IV],§20) for PS → U
that vanish at σ is naturally isomorphic to L×
S . Thus, by considering Taylor expansions
out to second order terms, we get an isomorphismOPS (−σS)/OPS (−3σS) ∼= J /J[3] (here
we use that p is odd). On the other hand, by multiplying and then taking the residue at
σ, we obtain a natural duality between OPS (−σS)/OPS (−3σS)a n dπ∗ωPS /U (3σS), where
π : PS → U is the natural projection. Also, note that via this duality, the ﬁltration induced
by π∗ωPS/U (2σS) ⊆ π∗ωPS /U (3σS)o n OPS (−σS)/OPS (−3σS) is the ﬁltration deﬁned by
the submodule OPS (−2σS)/OPS (−3σS). Since PS is clearly naturally isomorphic to the
projectivization of π∗ωPS/U (3σS), we thus obtain the result. ⃝
Crystalline Schwarz Structures and Monodromy
Let S be a Schwarz structure on Ulog. We would like to associate to S a subsheaf (in
the category of sets) of OˆUtr , which we shall call S12 as follows. We work locally. Thus,
we assume that there exists a biformal uniformizerz ∈ Γ(U, S). We consider the triformal
function z12 deﬁned by j12(z), where j12 is the natural mapOˆUbi →O ˆUtr given by inclusion
on the ﬁrst two factors. Then we let S12 be the sheaf of all functions which ´etale locally
can be written in the form ( az12 + b)/(cz12 + d), where a, b, c, dare triformal constants
and d is invertible. Note that the deﬁnition of S12 does not depend on the choice of z,
34

so everything glues together, and we obtain the subsheaf S12 of OˆUtr over our original U.
On the other hand, we also have a subsheaf S13 of OˆUtr deﬁned in the same way as S12,
except with the roles of 2 and 3 reversed.
Deﬁnition 1.5. We shall say that the Schwarz structure S is a crystalline Schwarz
structure on Ulog if the two subsheavesS12 and S13 of OˆUtr coincide. Let S be a crystalline
Schwarz structure on Ulog. Then we shall say that S has nilpotent monodromyif for every
marked point s : T → V (with V → U ´etale), there exists a biformal uniformizerz ∈S (V )
and a section a ∈ ωUlog/Slog (V ) such that the image of ( dz) − iR(a)( w h e r e“d”i st h e
exterior derivative on the right)i n OˆUbi ⊗OU s∗ωUlog/Slog is zero.
Remark. Of course, one may also phrase the deﬁnition of a crystalline Schwarz structure
as follows. First, note that OˆUbi , together with its right-hand sided OU -algebra structure
and standard logarithmic connection, forms a quasi-coherent crystal of algebras A on the
crystalline site ofUlog/Slog. Then a crystalline Schwarz structure is a subsheaf of the sheaf
A on the crystalline site of Ulog/Slog satisfying certain properties. Since this point of view
is only formally diﬀerent from the point of view of Deﬁnition 1.5, we shall use these two
points of view interchangeably in what follows.
Let us suppose that S is a Schwarz structure on U
log.L e t H ⊆ G be the open
subscheme consisting of matrices of the form
( ab
cd
)
,w h e r ed is invertible. Note that
H is stable under the action by B from the right. Thus, we can take the quotient of
H ×U BS (by the diagonal action of B) to obtain a ﬁber bundle HS → U with ﬁbers
locally isomorphic to H → U. Similarly, we also obtain a G-torsor GS → U.I t n o w
follows immediately from the deﬁnitions that the sheaf deﬁned on the ´ etale site of U by
HS is naturally isomorphic to S×. Thus, if we assume that the Schwarz structure S
is crystalline, we see that we get a natural isomorphism between the two pull-backs of
HS → U via iL,iR : OU →O ˆUbi , i.e., we get a logarithmic connection ∇HS on HS → U.
By basic facts about ﬁber bundles, this gives a logarithmic connection∇GS on GS → U and
a logarithmic connection ∇PS on PS → U, as well. Thus, in summary, to every crystalline
Schwarz structure S, we have associated a naturalP1-bundle with section and logarithmic
connection (PS → U;σS : U → PS; ∇PS ). Moreover, it follows from the deﬁnition of
the connection ∇PS that by diﬀerentiating σS by means of ∇PS , we get an isomorphism
τUlog/Slog ∼= σ∗
SτPS /U , which is called the Kodaira-Spencer morphism. Indeed, to see that
this morphism is, indeed, an isomorphism, it suﬃces to realize that if, locally on U,o n e
takes a biformal uniformizer z, the diﬀerence j12(z) − j13(z) generates j23( ˆJ )OˆUtr .
In addition to the fact that the Kodaira-Spencer morphism is an isomorphism, the
logarithmic connection ∇PS has another special property: If S has nilpotent monodromy,
then we can make more explicit the way in which this monodromy acts. Indeed, let
us recall from [Kato], §6, that if s : S → U is any marked point, then there exists a
unique subsheaf Ms of (OˆUbi ˆ⊗OU ,s−1 OS)/OS which is isomorphic to OS and annihilated
by the monodromy operator of the standard logarithmic connection on OˆUbi . (Locally,
35

this subsheaf is generated by log(1 − δ), where δ=1 − (1⊗t
t⊗1 ), and t is a local generator of
the ideal deﬁning s.) This subsheaf Ms thus deﬁnes a section qs : S → P(J /J[3])t h a t
lies over s. Then it follows from these observations, plus Proposition 1.4, that
Proposition 1.6. If S is a crystalline Schwarz structure on Ulog with nilpotent mon-
odromy, then under the isomorphism PS ∼= P(J /J[3]) of Proposition 1.4, qs is ﬁxed by
the monodromy action on PS ∼= P(J /J[3]) at s.
Correspondence with P1-bundles
So far, from a crystalline Schwarz structure, we have constructed a P1-bundle with
section and logarithmic connection (satisfying certain properties). We can go the other
way, as well. Suppose we are given a P
1-bundle with section and logarithmic connection
(π : P → U;σ : U → P; ∇P ) such that the Kodaira-Spencer morphism obtained by
diﬀerentiating σ via ∇P g i v e sa ni s o m o r p h i s mτUlog/Slog ∼= σ∗τP/U .L e tPL and PR denote
the pull-backs of π : P → U via iL,iR : OU →O ˆUbi , respectively. Then the connection ∇P
deﬁnes an OˆUbi -linear isomorphism Ξ : PL ∼= PR. Thus, we have a commutative diagram:
PL Ξ
−→ PR
⏐⏐↓πL
⏐⏐↓πR
ˆUbi id
−→ ˆUbi
Let σL (respectively, σR) denote the result of base-changing σ via iL (respectively, iR).
Then by applying (σL)∗, we can pull-back functions on PL to biformal functions on Ulog.
Let R denote the ´etale sheaf of degree ≤ 1 relative rational functions (as in [EGA IV],
§20) on P relative to π : P → U (i.e., the divisor of poles is ﬂat of degree ≤ 1o v e rU)
that are regular in a neighborhood of the image of σ.L e t αR : PR → P denote the
natural projection. Then it is easy to see that Ξ −1(αR)−1(R) deﬁnes a sheaf of functions
on PL that are regular in a neighborhood of Im( σL), so we can consider the subsheaf S
of biformal functions on Ulog which is the image of ( σL)−1Ξ−1(αR)−1(R). One checks
immediately that S deﬁnes a Schwarz structure, and, moreover, that since the connection
∇P is necessarily integrable (since the dimension of U over S is one), S is automatically
crystalline. Thus, in summary, we have the crystalline analogue of Theorem 2 of [Gunning]:
Theorem 1.7. If f : U → S is as above, then there is a natural one-to-one correspondence
between crystalline Schwarz structures onUlog and isomorphism classes ofP1-bundles with
section and logarithmic connection (π : P → U;σ : U → P; ∇P ) on Ulog whose associated
Kodaira-Spencer morphism is an isomorphism. Moreover, under this correspondence, the
crystalline Schwarz structures with nilpotent monodromy correpond precisely to the triples
such that ∇
P has nilpotent monodromy at the marked points.
36

Proof. We have already deﬁned maps going in either direction. Thus, it suﬃces to see
that these maps are inverse to each other. Now it is easy to see that if we start with
a P
1-bundle with section and logarithmic connection as above, construct the associated
crystalline Schwarz structure S, and then from that the associated P1-bundle PS with
section σS and logarithmic connection ∇PS , then we get back our original data. Thus, it
suﬃces to show that the map that associates a P1-bundle with section and connection to
a crystalline Schwarz structure is injective.
Let S and S′ be crystalline Schwarz structures on Ulog. Suppose that we are given
a horizontal isomorphism α between PS and PS′ that takes σS to σS′ .T h e nα induces
an isomorphism αB of the B-torsors BS and BS′ .L e t A be the OU -algebra OˆUbi via
the morphism iR. Since as sheaves with B-action, BS ∼= L×
S and BS′ ∼= L×
S′ ,w eg e ta n
isomorphism αL : L×
S → L×
S′ , which, by mapping a biformal uniformizer z ∈ Γ(U, L×
S )
(where U → X is ´etale) to the biformal uniformizer αL(z) ∈ Γ(U, L×
S′ ) ⊆ Γ(U, A), deﬁnes
an automorphism αA of the PD-OU -algebra A that preserves the augmentation μ : A→
OU . Moreover, it follows from the horizontality of α that αA is horizontal with respect
to the standard logarithmic connection on A. On the other hand, it is immediate that A
does admit any nontrivial horizontal automorphisms (as a PD- OU -algebra) that preserve
μ.T h u s ,αA is the identity, and hence, S and S′ must be the same subsheaf of A.T h i s
completes the proof of the ﬁrst statement. The last statement follows directly from the
deﬁnitions. ⃝
Schwarz Structures and Square Diﬀerentials
We would like to use Theorem 1.7 to exhibit the space of Schwarz structures as a
torsor over the square diﬀerentials. Let π : P → U be a P
1-bundle. Then we shall denote
by Ad(P) the vector bundle onU (of rank three with trivial determinant) given byπ∗τP/U .
When we consider marked points, it is not enough just to deal with P1-bundles; we must
deal with P1-bundles equipped with parabolic structures, as in [Sesh]. Thus, if our divisor
D of marked points is given by sections p1,... ,pr : S → U, we make the following
Deﬁnition 1.8. A P1-bundle with parabolic structure onUlog is deﬁned to be a P1-bundle
π : P → U, together with sections qi : S → P lying over pi.A rank two vector bundle
with parabolic structure on Ulog is a rank two vector bundle E, together with a parabolic
structure on P(E).
Let (π : P → U;q1,... ,qr)b ea P1-bundle with parabolic structure on Ulog.T h e n
we deﬁne the subsheaf Ad q(P) ⊆ Ad(P) to be the sheaf of sections that vanish at the
qi’s. We deﬁne Ad c(P) ⊆ Adq(P) to be the subsheaf of sections that vanish to second
order (in the relative coordinate for π)a tt h e qi’s. Suppose that we are given a section
σ : U → P that avoids all the qi.L e t L = σ∗ωP/U . Then Ad( P) gets a ﬁltration
0= F2(Ad(P)) ⊆ F1(Ad(P)) ⊆ F0(Ad(P)) ⊆ F −1(Ad(P)) = Ad(P) given by considering
sections of τP/U that vanish to ﬁrst or second order at σ. Thus, for Ad(P), we have:
37

F1 ∼= L; F0/F1 ∼= OU ; F −1/F0 ∼= L−1
This ﬁltration induces ﬁltrations on Ad q(P)a n dA dc(P). The subquotients are easily seen
to be the following: For Adq(P), we have:
F1 ∼= L(−D); F0/F1 ∼= OU ; F −1/F0 ∼= L−1
For Adc(P), we have:
F1 ∼= L(−D); F0/F1 ∼= OU (−D); F −1/F0 ∼= L−1
Often, L ∼= ωlog
U/S . Thus, for computational purposes, it is convenient to note that
ωlog
U/S (−D) is none other than the relative dualizing sheaf of the morphism f : U → S.
Now let us assume that π : P → U is given by P(J /J[3]), with the section σ given
by J /J[3] →J /J[2],a n dt h eqi given by the sections “ qs” deﬁned in the paragraph
preceding Proposition 1.6. Let ∇P be a logarithmic connection whose Kodaira-Spencer
morphism at σ is the identity and whose monodromy at the marked points is nilpotent
and ﬁxes the qi. (It is not diﬃcult to see that such ∇P always exist ´etale locally on U.)
Then any other such logarithmic connection ∇ ′
P on P → U is given by adding to ∇P a
section of F0(Adc(P)) ⊗OU ωlog
U/S . On the other hand, the quadruples ( π;σ;qi; ∇P )a n d
(π;σ;qi; ∇ ′
P ) are isomorphic if and only if ∇ ′
P can be obtained from ∇P by applying an
automorphism α of (π;σ;qi)t h a tpreserves the conormal bundle to σ (since both Kodaira-
Spencer morphisms are the identity) . Such an automorphism α is given by a section
of F1(Adq(P)). The eﬀect of such an automorphism α on the connection ∇P is given
by adding to ∇P the section of Ad c(P) ⊗OU ωlog
U/S obtained by applying the morphism
Ad(∇P ): F1(Adq(P)) → F0(Adc(P)) ⊗OU ωlog
U/S (induced by the connection ∇P )t o
α. Thus, we obtain that the set of isomorphism classes of quadruples (π;σ;qi; ∇P ) that,
relative to the bijection of Theorem 1.7, correspond to crystalline Schwarz structures with
nilpotent monodromy are a torsor over the cokernel of Ad(∇
P ). On the other hand, by
looking at the explicit representations of the subquotients of the ﬁltrations on Adq(P)a n d
Adc(P) (given in the preceding paragraph), and using the fact that the Kodaira-Spencer
morphism for ∇P at σ is an isomorphism, we obtain that
Coker(Ad(∇P )) ∼= (ωlog
U/S )⊗2(−D)
(We remark that here one uses the fact thatp is odd, for when one computes Ad(∇P )f r o m
∇P , certain factors of 2 appear, and in order to get the above isomorphism, one needs for
those factors of 2 to be invertible.)
In other words, we have proven the following result:
38

Theorem 1.9. The ´etale sheaf of crystalline Schwarz structures on Ulog with nilpotent
monodromy is naturally a torsor over the sheaf (ωlog
U/S )⊗2(−D).
Normalized P1-bundles with Connection
Let us consider the P1-bundle π : P = P(J /J[3]) → U, and section σ : U → P
given by J /J[3] →J /J[2], without any connection. Now, just as in the proof of Propo-
sition 1.4, by taking residues, we obtain a natural duality between OP (−σ)/OP (−3σ)
and π∗ωP/U (3σ) that respects the natural ﬁltrations on the two bundles. Let Q =
P((J /J[3])∨). As U-schemes, we may identify Q and P.L e t OQ(1) denote the line
bundle obtained from the deﬁnition of the projectivization; thus π∗OQ(1) = ( J /J[3])∨.
Let L = π∗{OQ(1)⊗OQ τP/U (−3σ)}.T h e nL is a line bundle onU and (J /J[3])∨ = L⊗ OU
π∗ωP/U (3σ). Thus, we obtain a natural isomorphismOP (−σ)/OP (−3σ) ∼= (J /J[3])⊗OU L
that respects ﬁltrations. If we then look at the quotients of both sides by their respective
rank one subbundles (that make up the ﬁltrations), we obtain an isomorphism between
ω
log
U/S
∼= OP (−σ)/OP (−2σ) ∼= (J /J[2]) ⊗L ∼= ωlog
U/S ⊗L . That is, we get a natural trivial-
ization OU ∼= L of L. In summary, we see thatwithout any connection, we have constructed
a natural ﬁltration-preserving isomorphism:
γ : OP (−σ)/OP (−3σ) ∼= J /J[3]
Now let us suppose that we have a logarithmic connection ∇P on π whose Kodaira-
Spencer morphism at σ is an isomorphism. Then we get a commutative diagram like the
one preceding Theorem 1.7. Pulling back by αR, then Ξ, and ﬁnally by σL, we thus see
that ∇P induces an isomorphism:
ζ(∇P ): OP (−σ)/OP (−3σ) ∼= J /J[3]
Now we saw above (Theorem 1.7) that∇P deﬁnes a Schwarz structure. But one “loose
end” relative to the statement of Theorem 1.7 is that although Schwarz structures have no
automorphisms, triples consisting of projective bundles with a section and a connection can
have automorphisms. These automorphisms were the cause of the phenomenon (observed
just before the statement of Theorem 1.9) that many diﬀerent∇
P can give rise to the same
Schwarz structure. Thus, it is convenient to have some sort of notion of a “normalized
∇
P ” such that each Schwarz structure arises from a unique normalized ∇P . We choose
the normalization as follows:
Deﬁnition 1.10. We say that ∇P is normalized if γ and ζ(∇P ) are inverse to each
other.
Now as a formal consequence of this deﬁnition, we observe that we obtain the following
normalized version of Theorem 1.7:
39

Theorem 1.11. If f : U → S is as above, then there is a natural one-to-one correspon-
dence between crystalline Schwarz structures on Ulog and normalized logarithmic connec-
tions on the P1-bundle π : P(J /J[3]) → U whose associated Kodaira-Spencer morphism
at the section σ : U → P (deﬁned by J /J[3] →J /J[2]) is an isomorphism. Moreover,
under this correspondence, the crystalline Schwarz structures with nilpotent monodromy
correpond precisely to the triples such that ∇
P has nilpotent monodromy at the marked
points.
The Schwarzian Derivative
Before proceeding, it is interesting to note that, as the name suggests, a crystalline
Schwarz structure S allows one to deﬁne a Schwarzian derivative dS, as follows. Let
ω×
Ulog/Slog ⊆ ωUlog/Slog denote the subsheaf consisting of sections that locally generate
ωUlog/Slog as an OU -module. Let O#
U ⊆O U be the subsheaf consisting of functions φ such
that dφ is a section of ω×
Ulog/Slog ⊆ ωUlog/Slog . Then our Schwarzian derivative will be a
morphism of sheaves of sets:
dS : O#
U → ω⊗2
Ulog/Slog
Let θbe a section of O#
U over some ´etale V → U. Let us denote by jθ ∈J /J[3](V )t h e2 -
jet of θ(i.e., the Taylor expansion out to second order, modulo the constant term). By the
deﬁnition of O#
U , the image ofjθ in J /J[2](V ) is a local generator of the sheafJ /J[2].B y
Proposition 1.6, jθ then deﬁnes a section sθ : V → PS. Taking the Kodaira-Spencer map
of this section then deﬁnes an OV -linear morphism from τUlog/Slog to the conormal bundle
to sθ, which is simply ωUlog/Slog .T h i sOV -linear morphism is thus given by multiplication
by a section of ω⊗2
Ulog/Slog , which we take to be dS(θ). A simple calculation reveals that
Proposition 1.12. If (as in Theorem 1.9) one modiﬁes the Schwarz structure S by
adding the square diﬀerential δ ∈ [(ωlog
U/S )⊗2(−D)](U) to obtain a Schwarz structure S′,
then dS(θ)= dS′ (θ)+ δ.
We also have a biformal version of the Schwarzian derivative. Namely, we letO#
ˆUbi be
the subsheaf of OˆUbi consisting of biformal functions φ that are of the form u + c,w h e r eu
is a biformal uniformizer, andc is a biformal constant. Then we get a morphism of sheaves
of sets:
dbi
S : O#
ˆUbi → (ω⊗2
Ulog/Slog )L def
= ω⊗2
Ulog/Slog ⊗OU OˆUbi
deﬁned as follows: If θ is a section of O#
ˆUbi over some ´etale V → U,w el e t jθ be the
section of J /J[3] ⊗OU OˆUbi which is the 2-jet of θ.T h u s ,jθ deﬁnes a section of sθ of PL
S
40

whose Kodaira-Spencer map is given by multiplication by a section of (ω⊗2
Ulog/Slog )L,w h i c h
we take as dbi
S (θ). Note that dbi
S (iL(θ)) = iL(dS(θ)), and that if we modify the Schwarz
structure by adding a square diﬀerential δ,t h e n
dbi
S (θ)= dbi
S′ (θ)+ iL(δ)
Remark. In the Appendix to this Chapter, we show that the deﬁnition just given for the
Schwarzian derivative coincides with one-half the classical Schwarzian derivative, whenU
is the projective line.
For the biformal version of the Schwarzian, we have an analogue of the classical
result that the Schwarzian vanishes exactly on the formal functions that make up the
projective structure of a Riemann surface. Indeed, let Ξ : PL
S → PR
S be the isomorphism
deﬁned by the connection ∇PS ;l e t αR : PR
S → PS be the natural projection; and let
ζ: ˆUbi def
=S p e c (OˆUbi ) → PS be the morphism obtained by composing σL
S : ˆUbi → PL
S with
Ξa n dt h e nαR. Since the deﬁnition of dS is functorial, dS applied to a function pulled back
by ζis ζ−1 of the “dS” computed for projective bundles in the Appendix, i.e., one-half the
classical Schwarzian. Thus, if θ is a section of S,t h e nθis the pull-back by ζ of a (degree
≤ 1) relative rational function for PS → U,s o dbi
S (θ)=0 .
Conversely, suppose that dbi
S (θ) = 0. Then the statement that dbi
S (θ)=0m e a n s
that sθ is a horizontal section of PL
S . Thus it follows from the deﬁnition of a connection,
together with the Poincar´e Lemma in crystalline cohomology (see, e.g., [Kato], §6 for the
log version) that Ξ(sθ) is the pull-back via αR of a section tθ of PS. Now (after possible
´etale localization), we can ﬁnd a (degree ≤ 1) relative rational function φ for PS → U
whose 2-jet at σS is given by the section tθ.S i n c eζ maps the diagonal in ˆUbi to σR
S ,a n d
the formation of 2-jets is functorial, it thus follows that the 2-jet of ψ
def
= ζ−1(φ) deﬁnes
a section sψ of PL
S which is equal to sθ when restricted to the diagonal U⊆ ˆUbi.B u t
since both sψ and sθ are horizontal, they must be equal. The biformal functions ψ and
θ thus have 2-jets that deﬁne the same “line” in J /J[3].L e t z be a local coordinate on
U. Let us denote by successive primes the derivatives of biformal functions (i.e., taken on
the left) with respect to z. Then we obtain that ψ′ and θ′ are both invertible biformal
functions such that ψ′′ · θ′ = ψ′ · θ′′. It thus follows that (ψ′/θ′)′ =0 ,s o θ′ = aψ ′,w h e r e
a is an invertible biformal constant. Thus, θ = aψ + b,w h e r eb is a biformal constant.
Since, by construction ψ ∈S (V ), it follows that θ ∈S (V ). Thus, we obtain the following
“crystalline Schwarzian Poincar´e Lemma:”
Theorem 1.13. If θ is a biformal function, then dbi
S (θ)=0 if and only if θ is a section
of S.
41

§2. Indigenous Bundles
In this Section, we globalize the local considerations of§1, and are thus led to introduce
“indigenous bundles” (as in [Gunning]). Let Slog be a ﬁne log scheme, whose underlying
scheme is connected noetherian. Letflog : Xlog → Slog be proper, geometrically connected,
and locally stable of dimension one. (Note that the ﬁrst two conditions are actually
conditions on the underlying scheme morphismf.) We assume that the ﬁbers off : X → S
have arithmetic genus g ≥ 0, and exactly r ≥ 0 marked points (as in Deﬁnition 1.1 – note
that these may only be deﬁned ´etale locally, however).
Basic Deﬁnitions and Examples
If 2g − 2+ r ≥ 1, then let
Mg,r be the moduli stack of stable curves of genus g,
with r marked points, over Z,a n dl e tζ : C→ Mg,r be the universal curve, with its r
marked points s1,... ,sr : Mg,r →C . Note that Mg,r has a natural log structure given
by the divisor at inﬁnity. Denote the resulting log stack M
log
g,r. Also, by taking the divisor
which is union of the si and the pull-back of the divisor at inﬁnity of Mg,r,w eg e tal o g
structure on C; we call the resulting log stack Clog.A l s o ,ζ: C→ Mg,r extends naturally
to a morphism of log stacks ζlog : Clog → M
log
g,r.
Deﬁnition 2.1. We shall say that flog : Xlog → Slog is stable if there exists a classifying
morphism φlog : Slog → M
log
g,r such that Xlog ∼= Slog ×M
log
g,r
Clog.
Ultimately, we shall be concerned mainly with the case whereflog is stable, but it is useful
to realize that the deﬁnition, as well as many of the ﬁrst properties, of indigenous bundles
can be made without these assumptions.
Let π : P → X be a P
1-bundle. If σ : X → P is a section, then we call the canonical
height of σ the number 1
2 degX/S(σ∗τP/X ), where degX/S denotes the relative degree overS
of a line bundle onX,a n dτP/X is the relative tangent bundle ofπ.I f ∇P is a logarithmic
connection on P, then we call the morphism τXlog/Slog → σ∗τP/X given by diﬀerentiating
σ by means of ∇P the Kodaira-Spencer morphism at σ relative to ∇P . Often, instead of
dealing with P1-bundles with logarithmic connections, it will be more convenient to deal
vector bundles: Thus, let E be a vector bundle equipped with a logarithmic connection
∇ E, whose rank is two and whose determinant is trivial. Then Theorem 1.7 motivates the
following
Deﬁnition 2.2. We shall say that (π : P → X, ∇P )i sa n indigenous bundle on Xlog if
the monodromy at the marked points (which exist ´etale locally) is nilpotent, and there
exists a section σ : X → P of π such that the Kodaira-Spencer morphism at σ with
respect to ∇P is an isomorphism. We shall say that (E, ∇ E)i sa n indigenous vector bundle
42

on Xlog if the associated P1-bundle with logarithmic connection (P(E) → X, ∇ P(E))i sa n
indigenous P1-bundle. We shall say thatP → X (respectively, E)i s intrinsic if there exists
a logarithmic connection ∇P (respectively, ∇ E)o n P → X (respectively, E)t h a tm a k e s
(P → X, ∇P ) (respectively, (E, ∇ E)) indigenous. We shall say that P → X (respectively,
E)i s locally intrinsic if it is intrinsic ´etale locally on S.
Thus, in the vector bundle case, (E, ∇ E) is indigenous if ∇ E has nilpotent monodromy
at the marked points, and there exists a rank one subbundle F0(E) ⊆E such that the
Kodaira-Spencer morphism F0(E) → ωXlog/Slog ⊗OX (E/F0(E)) (induced by ∇ E)i sa n
isomorphism.
So far we have been discussing the hyperbolic case (2g − 2+ r ≥ 1); however, one can
make the same deﬁnition for curves that are not hyperbolic.
Example 1. Suppose that f : X → S is smooth, with no marked points, and that
g =0 . T h u s ,f is a P1-bundle. Then the P1-bundle given by X ×S X → X has a natural
trivial connection, together with a natural section, the diagonal section. It is trivial to see
that this triple satisﬁes the required properties for an indigenous bundle.
Example 2. Suppose that f
log : Xlog → Slog has no marked points, and that its ﬁbers
all have arithmetic genus one. Then consider the bundle E = ωX/S ⊕O X (where ωX/S
is the relative dualizing sheaf). Let L = f∗ωX/S.T h u s ,L is a line bundle on S,a n d
f ∗L ∼= ωX/S. In particular, there exists on ωX/S a “trivial connection” ∇ω obtained from
tensoring the trivial connection on OX with f ∗L.L e t ∇ ′
E be the connection on E which
is the direct sum of ∇ω and the trivial connection on OX.L e t ∇ E be the connection on
E given by adding to ∇ ′
E the section of End(E) ⊗ ωX/S given by projecting E→ ωX/S ∼=
(0, OX) ⊗ ωX/S ⊆E⊗ ωX/S. Then one checks easily that if we take (P, ∇P )= P(E, ∇ E),
and σ : X → P to be given by ( ωX/S,0) ⊆E , then we obtain an indigenous bundle on
Xlog.
Example 3. Let Slog =S p e c (Z) (with the trivial log structure); Xlog = M1,1 (the
moduli stack of one-pointed curves of genus one over Z), with its natural log structure.
Let E be the vector bundle of rank two on X which is the ﬁrst de Rham cohomology
module of the universal one-pointed curve of genus one. Then E has a natural logarithmic
connection ∇ E, the so-called “Gauss-Manin connection.” There is also a natural Hodge
ﬁltration F1(E) ⊆E , which deﬁnes a section σ : X → P
def
= P(E). The pair ( E, ∇ E)f o r m s
the prototypical example of an indigenous bundle on Xlog.
First Properties
We now proceed to examine basic properties of such bundles.
43

Proposition 2.3. If flog : Xlog → Slog and hlog : Y log → Slog are as stipulated at the
beginning of the Section, and ζlog : Y log → Xlog is a log ´etale morphism of log schemes
over Slog that sends marked points to marked points, then the pull-back via ζlog of any
indigenous bundle is again indigenous.
Proof. This follows from the deﬁnitions. ⃝
Proposition 2.4. If π : P → X is intrinsic, then the section σ : X → P is of canonical
height 1 − g − 1
2 r.I f Xlog → Slog is a stable curve (so, in particular, 2g − 2+ r ≥ 1),
then σ is the unique section of π of canonical height 1 − g − 1
2 r. We shall refer to σ as the
Hodge section of π : P → X.
Proof. The fact that the canonical height ofσ is 1 − g − 1
2 r follows from the fact that the
Kodaira-Spencer morphism is an isomorphism. Now suppose that Xlog → Slog is stable.
Let us ﬁrst assume that S is the spectrum of an algebraically closed ﬁeld. Suppose that
σ′ : X → P also has canonical height 1− g − 1
2 r. Then it follows that its restriction to some
irreducible component of X has negative canonical height. Since the restriction of σ∗τP/X
to any irreducible component has negative degree, it follows immediately from considering
intersection numbers on P, together with the deﬁnition of “canonical height,” that there
cannot exist two distinct sections of negative canonical height over that irreducible com-
ponent. Thus, σ and σ
′ must agree over that irreducible component. Now if there are
any other irreducible components in X,t h e nσ′ must have negative canonical height over
some other irreducible component of X, in order for its canonical height over all of X to
be 1 − g − 1
2 r. Thus, repeating this argument shows that σ = σ′. Finally, let us observe
that the space of deformations ofσ is given byH0(X,σ ∗τP/X ), which is zero, sinceσ∗τP/X
has negative degree on every irreducible component of X. The result for general S then
follows immediately from this by deformation theory. ⃝
Now let us assume for the rest of the Section (unless stated otherwise) that there
exists an odd prime p which is nilpotent on S, together with a PD-ideal I⊆O S.
Proposition 2.5. If π : P → X is intrinsic, then P ∼= P(J /J[3]) (where J deﬁnes the
diagonal in Xbi). Moreover, for any connection on π that makes it indigenous, the mon-
odromy at a marked point s : S → X ﬁxes the section qs : S → P(J /J[3]) of Proposition
1.6.
Proof. This follows from Theorem 1.7 and Propositions 1.3 and 1.6. Note that the second
statement uses the fact that p is odd.⃝
Proposition 2.6. Suppose that the number of marked point plus nodes on any geometric
irreducible component of a ﬁber of X → S is even. Let (π : P → X, ∇P ) be indigenous on
44

Xlog.T h e n ´etale locally on S, there exists an indigenous vector bundle (E, ∇ E) on Xlog
whose projectivization is (π : P → X, ∇P ). Moreover, such an (E, ∇ E) is unique up to
tensor product with a line bundle with connection(L, ∇ L) on X whose square is trivial.
Proof. Consider the relative anticanonical bundle τP/X on P. By Proposition 2.5, (after
´etale localization on S) there exists a line bundle G on P whose square is τP/X .N o w
let us note that since the construction of the anticanonical bundle is canonical, it follows
that the connection ∇
P on the P1-bundle induces a connection on thepolarizedP1-bundle
(π : P → X,τP/X ). Moreover, since the “moduli space” of line bundles G whose square
is τP/X is ´etale over X, it follows that the connection ∇P on the P1-bundle π : P → X
in fact induces a connection on the polarized P1-bundle (π : P → X, G). Thus, we
get a connection ∇ E on E
def
= π∗G. Moreover, on P, we have a natural exact sequence
0 → ωP/X → (π∗E) ⊗G −1 →O P → 0, which induces an isomorphism det( π∗E) ∼= OP ,
hence an isomorphism det( E) ∼= OX, which is easily seen to be horizontal. Finally, it is
clear that the projectivization of (E, ∇ E) is isomorphic to (π : P → X, ∇P ).
Now suppose that both (E, ∇ E)a n d(E′, ∇ E′ ) have the same projectivization (π : P →
X, ∇P ). Then E deﬁnes a line bundle G on P whose square is τP/X and such that ∇P
induces a connection on the polarizedP1-bundle (π : P → X, G). Similarly, E′ deﬁnes a line
bundle G′ on P. Since we have horizontal isomorphisms G⊗2 ∼= τP/X and (G′)⊗2 ∼= τP/X ,
it follows that if we letL = π∗((G′)−1 ⊗G ), then L gets a natural connection ∇ L such that
the square of (L, ∇ L) is trivial. Moreover, ( E, ∇ E) ∼= (E′, ∇ E′ ) ⊗ (L, ∇ L). This completes
the proof. ⃝
In summary, the above Proposition tells us that (under the evenness assumption) up to
´etale localization on the base, it is essentially the same thing to give an indigenous P1-
bundle or an indigenous vector bundle. Thus, in the future, we shall frequently simply
speak of “indigenous bundles.” The same goes for intrinsic bundles.
Existence and de Rham Cohomology
The next step is to prove the existence of indigenous bundles, and to parametrize
them. We begin with the proof of existence. For the rest of this Section, we shall assume
that f
log is stable. Thus, in particular, 2g − 2+ r ≥ 1.
Theorem 2.7. For any r-pointed stable curve Xlog → Slog of genus g,t h eP1-bundle
P(J /J[3]) is locally intrinsic.
Proof. From Theorem 1.9, we know that the obstruction to the existence of a crystalline
Schwarz structure with nilpotent monodromy on Xlog (locally on S) is given by a section
of R1f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D)o v e rS. On the other hand, by Serre duality, R1f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D)
45

is isomorphic to the dual of f∗τXlog/Slog = 0, since the curve is stable. The Theorem now
follows form Proposition 1.6 and Theorem 1.7. ⃝
Next we wish to compute the de Rham cohomology of the P1-bundle with parabolic
structure (π;qi). Note that the exterior diﬀerential operator maps Ad( P) (respectively,
Adq(P)) into Adq(P) (respectively, Adc(P)). We deﬁne the parabolic de Rham cohomology
(respectively, with compact supports) ofAd(P) to be the hypercohomology of the complex
Ad(P) → Adq(P) ⊗ ωlog
X/S (respectively, Adq(P) → Adc(P) ⊗ ωlog
X/S).
Theorem 2.8. Let (P, ∇P ) be an indigenous bundle on an r-pointed stable curve flog :
Xlog → Slog of genus g. Then the de Rham cohomology of Ad(P) with its natural connec-
tion (induced by ∇P )i sa sf o l l o w s :
(1) For cohomology without compact supports, we have (fDR)∗(Ad(P)) =
R2(fDR)∗(Ad(P)) = 0; and we have a natural exact sequence
0 → f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D) → R1(fDR)∗(Ad(P)) → R1f∗τXlog/Slog → 0
(2) For cohomology with compact supports, we have (for alli ≥ 0) a natural
isomorphism
Ri(fDR)c,∗(Ad(P)) ∼= Ri(fDR)∗(Ad(P))
In particular, (P; ∇P ) has no nontrivial automorphisms.
Proof. To compute the de Rham cohomology, one uses the long exact cohomology se-
quences induced by the ﬁltrations considered above, plus the fact that the Kodaira-Spencer
morphism is an isomorphism. Now let α be an automorphism. Since (f
DR)∗(Ad(P)) = 0,
all inﬁnitesimal automorphisms must vanish, so we may work over an algebraically closed
ﬁeld. By passing to a tamely ramiﬁed covering of X ramiﬁed only at the marked points
and nodes, we may assume that the hypotheses of Proposition 2.6 are satisﬁed. Then let
L be a line bundle onP whose square is τ
P/X .S i n c eL ∼= OP (σ) ⊗OS M (for a line bundle
M on S), and α always preserves σ, it follows that α preserves L.T h u s ,α arises from a
horizontal section of End(π∗L)= OX ⊕ Ad(P), hence is induced by multiplying π∗L by a
section of OS.T h u s ,α is the identity, as desired. ⃝
Finally, combining what we have done in this Section with Theorem 1.7, we obtain:
Corollary 2.9. Let flog : Xlog → Slog be an r-pointed stable curve of genus g.T h e n
the set of crystalline Schwarz structures on X with nilpotent monodromy is in one-to-one
46

correspondence the set of isomorphism classes of indigenous P1-bundles on Xlog.M o r e -
over, the functor that assigns to Tlog → Slog the set of crystalline Schwarz structures with
nilpotent monodromy on Xlog
T = Xlog ×Slog Tlog is a torsor over f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D).
Indigenous Bundles of Restrictable Type
Let flog
i : Xlog
i → Slog (for i =1 ,... ,n)b ea n ri-pointed smooth curve of genus gi
(where 2gi − 2+ ri ≥ 1 for all i). Suppose that we are given a graph Γ consisting of n
vertices, numbered 1 through n.L e t Ei be the set of edges of the ith vertex. Suppose
further that we are given an injection λi : Ei ↪→{ 1, ... ,ri}. Then we can glue together
the curves flog
i : Xlog
i → Slog to form an r-pointed stable curve flog : Xlog → Slog of genus
g in such a way that the dual graph of flog is given by Γ, that is:
(1) vertex i corresponds to flog
i : Xlog
i → Slog, an irreducible component of
Xlog;
(2) if ϵ is an edge running from vertex i to vertex j such that λi(ϵ)= a
and λj(ϵ)= b,t h e nϵ corresponds to a node on Xlog obtained by gluing
together Xlog
i at the ath marked point to Xlog
j at the bth marked point;
(3) g and r can be computed combinatorially from Γ, thegi’s, the ri’s and
the λi’s.
Let μlog
i : Xlog
i ↪→ Xlog be the inclusion of Xlog
i into Xlog as one of the irreducible
components.
Now let us suppose that we are given an indigenous bundle (π : P → X; ∇P )o n Xlog.
Then it is not necessarily the case that(μlog
i )∗(π : P → X; ∇P ) will be indigenous onXlog
i .
The problem is that since in general, marked points ofXlog
i might be sent to nodes ofXlog
(and not to marked points), there is no reason why the monodromy at such marked points
of Xlog
i should be nilpotent. We therefore make the following
Deﬁnition 2.10. If the (μlog
i )∗(π : P → X; ∇P ) are indigenous on Xlog
i for all i,t h e nw e
say that (π : P → X; ∇P )i s of restrictable type.
Now let us suppose that we are given indigenous bundles Π i =( πi : Pi → Xi; ∇Pi )
on Xlog
i . Note that for each marked point s : S → Xi of an Xlog
i , s∗Pi has a canonical
trivialization as a P1-bundle given by considering:
(1) the Hodge section σi : Xi → Pi (pulled-back by s);
(2) the trivialization of s∗(σ∗
i ωPi/Xi ) given by the residue map; and
(3) the section qs : S → s∗Pi of Proposition 1.6.
47

It thus follows that we can glue together the Πi’s by means of this canonical trivialization
at the marked points to obtain an indigenous bundle Π = ( π : P → X; ∇P )o n Xlog.
Moreover, by construction, Π is of restrictable type.
Also, we can clearly reverse the procedure: Namely, if we start with an indigenous
bundle Π on Xlog of restrictable type, we can reconstruct Π by restricting to the Xlog
i ’s,
and then regluing, in the fashion described in the preceding paragraph. Now let us deﬁne
E
def
=
n⨁
i=1
(fi)∗ω⊗2
Xlog
i /Slog (−Di)
where Di is the divisor of marked points on Xi. Then we have the following result:
Proposition 2.11. The ´etale sheaf onS of isomorphism classes of indigenousP1-bundles
of restrictable type on Xlog is a torsor over the vector bundle E.
Note that the rank of E is given by ∑n
i=1(3gi − 3+ ri), which, in general, is strictly less
than 3g − 3+ r.
§3. The Obstruction to Global Intrinsicity
In §2, we saw that the P1-bundle P(J /J[3])i s locally intrinsic on Mg,r.I n t h i s
Section, we study the obstruction (which, in general, is nonzero) to it being globally
intrinsic over all of
Mg,r. The main point is a computation in Hodge cohomology which,
in many respects, is similar to that of [Falt3], Lemma IV.4. Since, however, it is not
literally the same as [Falt3], and certain technical aspects of the computation are diﬀerent,
we provide a complete proof here.
Introduction of Cohomology Classes
We shall work over a ﬁeld K of characteristic zero, say Q
p, until we state otherwise.
Since we are only interested in certain intersection numbers, the base ﬁeld is essentially
irrelevant. Let us consider the universal r-pointed stable curve of genus g, ζ : C→
Mg,r
(over K). We would like to consider various cohomology classes on C and Mg,r.T h e
cohomology theory that we will use is Hodge theory, so all cohomology classes are to be
understood as being Hodge-theoretic. Let π : P = P(J /J
[3]) →C be the P1-bundle
which, as we saw in§2, is locally intrinsic. Let F =A d (P). Thus, F has a ﬁltration whose
subquotients are given by:
F1 ∼= L; F0/F1 ∼= OC; F −1/F0 ∼= L−1
48

where L = ωClog/M
log
g,r
.L e tη= c1(L), the ﬁrst Chern class of L.T h e nw eh a v e :c1(F)=0 .
On the other hand, the second Chern class of F is given by:
c2(F)= −η2
Let us compute ζ∗η2.L e t Di ⊆C (where i =1 ,... ,r ) be the marked points. Let
D = ∑r
i=1 Di. We shall write [ Di]; [D] for the respective cohomology classes on C.L e t
ξ = c1(ωC/Mg,r
). Thus, η = ξ+[ D]. Since diﬀerent Di’s do not intersect, we have
[Di] · [Dj]=0i f i ̸= j. Also, by “taking the residue,” we see that ζ∗{(ξ+[ Di]) · [Di]} =0 ,
for all i.T h u s ,ζ∗{(ξ+[ D]) · [D]} =0 . L e tψi = ζ∗(ξ· [Di]); ψ = ∑r
i=1 ψi; θ= ζ∗ξ2.T h e n
we obtain:
ζ∗η2 = ζ∗{(ξ+[ D]) · ξ}
= θ+ ψ
Now one knows from [AC] that for g ≥ 3, the restrictions of the classes θ and ψ to Mg,r
are linearly independent. We summarize this in a Lemma:
Lemma 3.1. We have, on Mg,r, ζ∗η2 = θ+ ψ. In particular, if g ≥ 3,t h e n(ζ∗η2)|Mg,r
is nonzero.
We shall see below that ζ∗c2(F) can be related to the obstruction to the existence of a
global indigenous bundle on C. Thus, once we have done this, we will have proven that
this obstruction is given by the relatively computable cohomology class −ζ∗η2 on Mg,r.
Computation of the Second Chern Class
Let us ﬁrst observe that P |D has a canonical trivialization as a P1-bundle given by
using:
(1) the Hodge section σ : C→ P (restricted to D);
(2) the trivialization of (σ∗ωP/C)|D given by the residue map; and
(3) the section qs : D → P ×C D of Proposition 1.6.
Let us denote by Clog
c the log stack obtained by letting C be the underlying stack and
taking for the log structure the pull-back of the log structure ofM
log
g,r via ζ.T h u s ,w eh a v e
an exact sequence on C:
0 → ζ∗ΩM
log
g,r
→ ΩClog
c
→ ωC/Mg,r
→ 0
49

where the ﬁrst two sheaves of diﬀerentials are overK. In the future, we shall think of this
exact sequence as deﬁning a one-step ﬁltration on Ω Clog
c
.F o ri, j ≥ 0, let us deﬁne for any
OC-module G:
Hi,j
c (C, G)
def
= Hi(C, G⊗ OC ∧jΩClog
c
)
This cohomology is a sort of cohomology with compact supports outsideD.T h u s ,b yu s i n g
the canonical trivialization of P |D referred to above, we see that the global obstruction to
the existence of a logarithmic connection onπ : P →C (for the log structure ofClog)w h i c h
has normalized nilpotent monodromy at D deﬁnes a class κ ∈ H1,1
c (C,Ad(P)). Now, by
taking the trace of the square ofκ, we get a class in tr(κ2) ∈ H2,2
c (C, OC). If we then apply
ζ∗, we get a class ζ∗tr(κ2) ∈ H1,1(M
log
g,r)
def
= H1(Mg,r,ΩM
log
g,r
). On the other hand, let us
denote by:
Sg,r → Mg,r
the Ω M
log
g,r
-torsor deﬁned by looking at the crystalline Schwarz structures with nilpotent
monodromy on C (as in Corollary 2.9). This torsor thus deﬁnes a class Σ ∈ H1,1(M
log
g,r).
The goal of this subsection is to prove the following:
Lemma 3.2. We have the following equality of classes in H1,1(M
log
g,r): Σ= 1
2 ζ∗tr(κ2).
Now let us note that H1,1
c (C,Ad(P)) has two one-step ﬁltrations: one arising from
the Leray-Serre spectral sequence applied to ζ, and the other arising from the ﬁltration
deﬁned above on Ω Clog
c
. Thinking in these terms, we see that we get a morphism:
φ00 : H1,1
c (C,Ad(P)) → H0(Mg,r,R1ζ∗(Ad(P) ⊗ ωC/Mg,r
))
Now since we know thatP →C admits a connection of the desired type on the ﬁbers of ζ,
it follows that φ00(κ)=0 .
Next let us consider the natural morphism:
φ10 : H1,1
c (C,Ad(P)) → H1(C,Ad(P) ⊗ ωC/Mg,r
)
Since φ00(κ) = 0, it follows from considering the Leray-Serre spectral sequence thatφ10(κ)
lies in H1(Mg,r,ζ∗(Ad(P) ⊗ ωC/Mg,r
)) ↪→ H1(C,Ad(P) ⊗ ωC/Mg,r
). In fact, by consid-
ering only normalized connections (as in Deﬁnition 1.10), we can say more. Namely, it
follows that φ10(κ) is actually the image under the morphism H1(Mg,r,ζ∗(ωClog/M
log
g,r
⊗
ωC/Mg,r
)) → H1(Mg,r,ζ∗(Ad(P) ⊗ ωC/Mg,r
)) (induced by ωClog/M
log
g,r
↪→ Ad(P)) of the
50

class Σ (regarded as a class in H1(Mg,r,ζ∗(ωClog/M
log
g,r
⊗ ωC/Mg,r
)) by means of the tauto-
logical isomorphism ΩM
log
g,r
∼= ζ∗(ωClog/M
log
g,r
⊗ ωC/Mg,r
)).
Now let us consider the natural morphism:
φ01 : H1,1
c (C,Ad(P)) → H0(Mg,r,R1ζ∗(Ad(P) ⊗ ΩClog
c
))
Since φ00(κ) = 0, it follows that the section φ01(κ)o f R1ζ∗(Ad(P) ⊗ ΩClog
c
) lies in the
image of the natural map
ι: R1ζ∗(Ad(P) ⊗ ΩM
log
g,r
) → R1ζ∗(Ad(P) ⊗ ΩClog
c
)
In fact, we can say more. Since we are dealing with sheaves on Mg,r, we can compute
locally on Mg,r.L e t U → Mg,r be ´etale. Let ∇P be a logarithmic connection with
normalized nilpotent monodromy (relative toζU : CU → U)o n PU = P ×Mg,r
U. Then the
obstruction to lifting∇P to a logarithmic connection relative toCU → Spec(K) is giving by
subtracting the two pull backs of (PU → U; ∇P ) to the ﬁrst inﬁnitesimal neighborhood Δ U
of the diagonal of U ×K U. Note that it only makes sense to compare these two pull-backs
because we have chosen a connection∇P , so that we can deal withcrystals on Crys(CU /Δ U )
(where the structure morphism CU → Δ U is given by composing ζU : CU → U with the
diagonal embedding U↪ → Δ U ). Thus, the diﬀerence between the pull-backs deﬁnes a
section δ(over U)o fΩ M
log
g,r
|U ⊗R1(ζU )DR,∗(Ad(P), ∇P ). Now if we compose the projection
R1(ζU )DR,∗(Ad(P), ∇P ) → R1(ζU )∗τClog
U /Ulog with δ,w eg e tam o r p h i s m
(ΩM
log
g,r
)∨|U =Θ M
log
g,r
|U → R1(ζU )∗τClog
U /Ulog
Now it is a tautology that this morphism is none other than the isomorphism β derived
from deformation theory of the tangent space to M
log
g,r with the ﬁrst cohomology group
of the relative tangent bundle of ζlog. Thus, in summary, we have proven the following
statement:
(*) locally on Mg,r, φ10(κ) is the image under ιof some local section
ν of R1ζ∗(Ad(P) ⊗ ΩM
log
g,r
) whose image in R1ζ∗(τClog/Mg,r
) ⊗ ΩM
log
g,r
is
the tautological isomorphism β.
We are now ready to consider ζ∗tr(κ2). We begin by using the observations of the
preceding two paragraphs to compute what happens when we multiply various subquotients
of the two ﬁltrations on H
1,1
c (C,Ad(P)) by each other:
(1) If we multiply two elements in the image of H1(Mg,r,ζ∗(Ad(P)) ⊗
ΩM
log
g,r
), and take the trace, we get a (2 ,2)-Hodge cohomology class on
51

C which is the pull-back of such a class onMg,r; thus, if we apply ζ∗ to
such a product, we get zero.
(2) If we multiply an element in the image ofH1(Mg,r,ζ∗(Ad(P))⊗ΩM
log
g,r
)
by an element in the image ofH0(Mg,r,R1ζ∗(Ad(P))⊗ΩM
log
g,r
), and take
the trace, we get a class in H1(Mg,r,R1ζ∗OC ⊗∧ 2ΩM
log
g,r
); since there
are no factors of ωC/Mg,r
in the wedge product, applying ζ∗ again gives
zero.
(3) If we multiply two elements of H0(Mg,r,R1ζ∗(Ad(P)) ⊗ ΩM
log
g,r
), we
get zero since ζ has relative dimension one.
(4) If we multiply an element in the image ofH1(Mg,r,ζ∗(Ad(P))⊗ΩM
log
g,r
)
by φ10(κ) ∈ H1(Mg,r,ζ∗(Ad(P) ⊗ ωC/Mg,r
)), and take the trace, we get
zero, since we are taking the trace of the product of a nilpotent section
of Ad(P) with a section of the same Borel subalgebra of Ad(P).
(5) If we squareφ10(κ) ∈ H1(Mg,r,ζ∗(Ad(P)⊗ωC/Mg,r
)), we get zero since
we are, in eﬀect, squaring nilpotent sections of Ad(P).
(6) If we multiply φ10(κ) ∈ H1(Mg,r,ζ∗(Ad(P) ⊗ ωC/Mg,r
)) by φ01(κ) ∈
H0(Mg,r,R1ζ∗(Ad(P) ⊗ ΩClog
c
)), then we are, in eﬀect, multiplying the
class Σ by the tautological isomorphismβ, so that we obtain Σ, regarded
as a class in H1(Mg,r,ΩM
log
g,r
).
Thus, in summary, all of the possible contributions are zero, except for the last, which is
2Σ. This completes the proof of Lemma 3.2. On the other hand, by basic linear algebra,
c
2(Ad(P)) is −2t r (κ2), so we see that we have, in fact, proven the following:
Lemma 3.3. We have ζ∗c2(Ad(P)) = −4Σ.
Finally, putting this together with Lemma 3.1, we see that we have explicitly computed
the class Σ in terms of well-known ﬁrst Chern classes of line bundles:
Theorem 3.4. The torsor of Schwarz structures deﬁnes a class Σ ∈ H1(Mg,r,ΩM
log
g,r
)
which is equal to 1
4 (θ+ ψ),w h e r eθ = ζ∗ξ2; ψ = ζ∗(ξ· [D]); ξ = c1(ωC/Mg,r
);a n d [D]
is the cohomology class of the divisor of marked points. In particular, if g ≥ 3,t h e n( i n
characteristic zero) Sg,r →M g,r does not admit any sections, i.e., there are no canonical
Schwarz structures on r-pointed smooth curves of genus g ≥ 3.
Remark. Ideally, it would be nice to have an equality of classes not in H1(Mg,r,ΩM
log
g,r
),
but in some sort of cohomology with compact supports “H1
c (Mg,r,ΩM
log
g,r
)” (which should
52

be isomorphic toH1(Mg,r,ΩMg,r
)). In order to do this, one would have to deﬁne some sort
of appropriate sense in which Σ is compactly supported, i.e., one would have to deﬁne some
sort of trivializations ofSg,r → Mg,r at inﬁnity. In fact, Sg,r → Mg,r does not (in general)
have a canonical section over the divisor at inﬁnity. However, by considering indigenous
bundles ofrestrictable type, one can show that, so to speak, “the more singular a curve gets,
the more of a canonical trivialization one has for Sg,r → Mg,r.” For instance, if the curve
is totally degenerate, i.e., it can be constructed by gluing together (as at the end of §2) a
number of copies ofP1 with three marked points, thenSg,r → Mg,r does have a canonical
trivialization, as follows immediately from Proposition 2.11 (since then the indigenous
bundles of restrictable type form a torsor over the zero sheaf). Thus, in some sort of
combinatorially complicated sense, by considering indigenous bundles of restrictable type,
one can exhibit Σ as a cohomology class with compact supports. Unfortunately, however,
the combinatorics involved get rather complicated in general, so we shall not carry this
out explicitly, except in the case when the dimension of
Mg,r is one, where things are not
so diﬃcult.
The Case of Dimension One
In this case, either g = r =1o r g =0 , r =4 . L e tD∞ ⊆ Mg,r be the divisor at
inﬁnity. Since D∞ is zero-dimensional, in this case we do have a canonical trivializationt∞
of Sg,r → Mg,r over D∞ . Now we shall give a new deﬁnition of cohomology with compact
supports that takes into account this trivializationt∞ .L e tωClog
!
(respectively, ω(M
log
g,r)!
)b e
the subsheaf ωC/Mg,r
(−D∞ ) (respectively,ωM
log
g,r
(−D∞ )) of ωC/Mg,r
(respectively, ωMg,r
).
Let Ω Clog
!
be the inverse image of ωClog
!
⊆ ωC/Mg,r
via the morphism Ω Clog
c
→ ωC/Mg,r
.
Thus, we have an exact sequence:
0 → ζ∗ΩM
log
g,r
→ ΩClog
!
→ ωClog
!
→ 0
which deﬁnes a ﬁltration on Ω Clog
!
.T h e nf o ri, j ≥ 0, let us deﬁne for any OC-module G:
Hi,j
! (C, G)
def
= Hi(C, G⊗ OC ∧jΩClog
!
)
and for any OMg,r
-module H:
Hi,j
! (Mg,r, H)
def
= Hi(Mg,r, H⊗ OMg,r
∧jω(M
log
g,r)!
)
Note that the push forward map ζ∗ naturally deﬁnes a morphism ζ∗ : H2,2
! (C, OC) →
H1,1
! (Mg,r, OMg,r
). Now the obstruction to putting a logarithmic connection on P →C
with normalized nilpotent monodromy at the marked points and which is of restrictable
53

type at inﬁnity is given by a class κ! ∈ H1,1
! (C,Ad(P)). On the other hand, the torsor
Sg,r → Mg,r together with the trivialization t∞ deﬁnes a class Σ ! ∈ H1,1
! (Mg,r, OMg,r
).
By the same proof as before, we have Σ! = 1
2 ζ∗tr(κ2
! ). (In the present case, however,
one might remark that in the six types of product considered previously, the ﬁrst two types
(numbered (1) and (2)) of product vanish all the more trivially since they involve∧
2ωM
log
g,r
,
which is zero.) Also, just as before, we have c2(Ad(P)) = −2t r (κ2
! ). Thus, we obtain:
Theorem 3.5. In H1,1
! (Mg,r, OMg,r
)= K,w eh a v e
Σ! = 1
4ζ∗η2
where η= c1(ωClog/M
log
g,r
).
Let us compute ζ∗η2 in the case g =1 ,r = 1. First we introduce the classes θ= ζ∗ξ2;
ψ = ζ∗(ξ· [D]); and λ = c1(ζ∗ωC/Mg,r
). By Grothendieck-Riemann-Roch, θ=0 . O nt h e
other hand, sorting through the deﬁnitions, one sees that ψ = λ. Thus, we obtain that for
g =1 , r =1 :
Σ! = 1
4λ
Next let Nlog : M
log
1,1[2] → M
log
1,1 be the ﬁnite, log ´etale covering such that M
log
1,1[2]
is the moduli stack that parametrizes elliptic curves with level structure on the 2-torsion
points. Let
Λlog : M
log
1,1[2] → M
log
0,4
be the log ´etale morphism given by sending an elliptic curve with a trivialization of its
two torsion to the four-pointed curve of genus zero of which the elliptic curve is a double
covering (with ramiﬁcation exactly at the four marked points). Moreover, Λ
log admits a
section over any double covering of M
log
0,4 (since the obstruction to such a section lies in
H2
et(M0,4,Z/2Z)). Note that both Nlog and Λlog are, in fact, deﬁned over Z[1
2 ]. Also,
note that (over Z[1
2 ] ) ,w eh a v ea ni s o m o r p h i s mΛ∗S0,4 ∼= N ∗S1,1 obtained by pulling-back
and pushing forward indigenous bundles. We thus obtain the following result:
Theorem 3.6. When Mg,r is one-dimensional, the torsor Sg,r → Mg,r does not admit
any section which is equal to t∞ over D∞ modulo any prime ≥ 5.
54

Proof. We have (Σ!)1,1 = 1
4 λ1,1,a n dλ1,1 = 1
2 c1(ωM
log
1,1
), so (Σ!)1,1 = 1
8 c1(ωM
log
1,1
). Thus,
since Nlog is log ´etale, and N ∗(Σ!)1,1 is an invertible multiple of Λ ∗(Σ!)0,4, it suﬃces to
show that:
(1) in Hodge cohomology modulo p (for a prime p ≥ 5), Λ ∗c1(ωM
log
0,4
)=
N ∗c1(ωM
log
1,1
)i s nonzero;i nf a c t ,s i n c eΛlog admits a section over any
double covering of M
log
0,4, it suﬃces merely to show that c1(ωM
log
0,4
)i s
nonzero modulo p;
(2) the formation ofH1,1
! (M0,4, OM0,4
) commutes with base change modulo
p (for p an odd prime).
But both (1) and (2) follow immediately from the fact that M0,4 is just P1,w i t hD∞ =
{0, 1, ∞} . (Note that there is a slight subtlety here in that (2) is not immediately obvious
for M1,1 since it is a stack; this is why we choose to verify the assertions of the Theorem
by means of M0,4.) ⃝
Appendix: Relation to the Complex Analytic Case
In this Appendix, we make the connection between the theory of Schwarz structures
discussed here and the classical notion of the Schwarzian derivative in complex analysis.
Let K be an algebraically closed ﬁeld of characteristic zero (such as, for instance, the
complex numbers C). Let X → Spec(K) be a smooth, proper, connected curve. Let
P = P(J /J
[3]) be the usualP1-bundle on X,a n dl e t∇P b eac o n n e c t i o no nP → X that
makes it indigenous. Then just as in §1, we can form the Schwarzian derivative:
D : O#
X → ω2
X/K
Then the purpose of this Appendix is to show that whenX = P1; z is the standard rational
function on P1;a n d ω2
X/K is trivialized by ( dz)2,t h e nD(φ) is given (up to a factor of
two) by the classical formula for the Schwarzian derivative.
First, let us note that whenX = P1, there exists only one connection ∇P on π : P →
X that makes it indigenous. Indeed, this follows from the fact that Ad(P) ⊗OX ωX/K has
no sections for degree reasons, plus the fact that the extension
0 →J [2]/J[3] →J /J[3] →J /J[2] → 0
does not split (since the extension class is the Hodge-theoretic ﬁrst Chern class c1(ωX/K),
which is nonzero). It thus follows that (P; ∇P ) is necessarily isomorphic to the indigenous
55

bundle constructed in Example 1 of§2. Thus, P ∼= X ×K X (where we regard the projection
to the second factor as the structure morphism to X); let us ﬁx such an isomorphism for
the rest of the discussion. Also, the Kodaira-Spencer morphism at the diagonal section
σΔ : X → X ×K X ∼= P is an isomorphism. Let z be the standard rational function
on X.L e t U ⊆ X be the complement of inﬁnity. Thus, z is regular on U.W e s h a l l
work mainly on U.F o r i =1 ,2, let pi : P ∼= X ×K X → X be the projection to the ith
factor. Let ζ be the relative rational function on P |U → U given by p∗
1(z) − p∗
2(z). Let us
simply denote by ∇ the result of applying ∇P in the tangent direction d
dz . Then clearly,
∇(ζ)= −1. Let η =1 /ζ.T h u s ,∇(η)= η2. Now if we regard P as P(J /J[3]), and s is
a section given by [ ad z , b(dz)2]( w h e r ea, b ∈O X(V ), for some open V ⊆ U), then we
have ζ(s)= a/b. Indeed, both sides of this equation deﬁne relative rational functions on
P |U → U. The right-hand side has a simple pole at the section [ dz, 0 · (dz)2], which, by
computing residues as in the deﬁnition of the isomorphism of Proposition 1.4, corresponds
to the section ∞× U. Thus, both sides of the equation have a simple pole at ∞× U,a n d
the same 1-jet at σ
Δ , hence are equal. In particular, η(s)= b/a.
Now suppose we are givenφ ∈O #
X(V ). The 2-jet jφ of φ is given byφ′ dz + 1
2 φ′′(dz)2.
Thus, if sφ is the section of P over V that is deﬁned by jφ,w eh a v eη(sφ)= φ′′
2φ′ .T h u s ,
we compute:
( φ′′
2φ′ )′ = ∇(η(sφ))
= {∇(η)}(sφ)+ η(∇(sφ))
= η2(sθ)+ D(φ)( dz)−2
= (φ′′)2
4(φ′)2 + D(φ)( dz)−2
Expanding the derivative on the left and rearranging terms, we get:
D(φ)= {φ′′′
2φ′ − (φ′′)2
2(φ′)2 − (φ′′)2
4(φ′)2 } (dz)2
= 1
2 {φ′′′
φ′ − 3(φ′′)2
2(φ′)2 } (dz)2
We have thus shown the following result:
Theorem A. On P1, the Schwarzian derivative deﬁned at the end of §1i se q u a lt o
one-half the classical Schwarzian derivative.
For a treatment of the classical Schwarzian derivative, we refer to [Lehto].
56

Chapter II: Indigenous Bundles in Characteristic p
§0. Introduction
In this Chapter, we study indigenous bundles in characteristicp. In particular, we will
be concerned with how these bundles interact with Frobenius. Our main tool for studying
this interaction will be the p-curvature. We begin in §1 by studying FL-bundles, which
are a special kind of rank two vector bundle with connection on a curve that corresponds
to a lifting of the curve modulo p
2.I n §2, we deﬁne the Verschiebung map on indigenous
bundles to be the determinant of thep-curvature of the indigenous bundle. It turns out that
(essentially) indigenous bundles arise from FL-bundles precisely when their Verschiebung
vanishes. Since it is precisely this sort of indigenous bundle – which (following [Katz]) we
call nilpotent – that corresponds to an MF∇ -object in the sense of [Falt], it is worthwhile
deﬁning and studying the moduli space Ng,r of such bundles. In order to study Ng,r,w e
make two fundamental calculations (Theorems 2.3 and 2.13) concerning the Verschiebung.
The ﬁrst tells us that the Verschiebung is ﬁnite and ﬂat, of degree p
3g−3+r, and the second
calculates the derivative the Verschiebung in terms of invariants of the indigenous bundle
which are easier to compute. In §3, we deﬁne the hyperbolic (higher genus) analogue of an
ordinary elliptic curve: namely, we say that a hyperbolic curve is hyperbolically ordinary
if it admits a nilpotent indigenous bundle at which the derivative of the Verschiebung is
an isomorphism. Using the general machinery developed in §2, we then do a number of
computations involving totally degenerate curves and elliptic curves which reveal that:
(1) the hyperbolically ordinary locus of
Mg,r is open and dense (Corollary
3.8);
(2) if one applies the deﬁnition of ordinariness in terms of indigenous bun-
dles to the case of elliptic curves, one recovers the classical deﬁnition of
an ordinary elliptic curve (Theorem 3.11); and
(3) (at least if g ≥ 3, and p is suﬃciently large then) each irreducible
component of
Ng,r that passes through a certain canonical nilpotent
indigenous bundle on a totally degenerate curve has degree ≥ 2o v e r
Mg,r; thus, there is no canonical choice of a nilpotent indigenous bundle
on a generic r-pointed stable curve of genus g (Proposition 3.13).
We end the Chapter with the observation that (3) is interesting in the sense that it con-
stitutes a deviation from the behavior that one might expect by analogy to the complex
case.
57

§1. FL-Bundles
In this Section, we develop the theory of a certain kind of rank two bundle, which we
call an FL-bundle, which arises from looking at the Cartier isomorphism of a curve. It
turns out that the space of such bundles can also be used to parametrize the inﬁnitesimal
deformations of a curve toZ/p
2Z. The material we present here is essentially “well-known”
(see, e.g., [Kato], §4), although our point of view is a little diﬀerent. Letp be a prime. Let
S be a noetherian scheme overFp. Let us assume that we are given a ﬁne log structure on
S, and let us denote the resulting log scheme bySlog. Let us denote the absolute Frobenius
([Kato], §4) of Slog by ΦSlog : Slog → Slog.L e t flog : Xlog → Slog be an r-pointed stable
curve of genus g (as in Chapter I, Deﬁnition 2.1, so 2 g − 2+ r ≥ 1). In general, we
shall denote by means of a superscript “ F” the result of base-changing by Φ Slog .L e t
ΦXlog/Slog : Xlog → (Xlog)F def
= Xlog ×Slog,ΦSlog Slog be the relative Frobenius.
Deformations and FL-Bundles
We begin by reviewing the Cartier isomorphism (as in [Kato], Theorem 4.12). Since
a curve is one-dimensional, this amounts to the existence of an exact sequence of sheaves
on X:
0 → (Φ
Xlog/Slog )−1OXF →O X → ωlog
X/S → (ΦXlog/Slog )−1(ωlog
X/S)F → 0
where the morphism in the middle is the exterior diﬀerentiation operator d.L e t Q
def
=
d(OX) ⊆ ωlog
X/S. Then note that since the above exact sequence is functorial with to base-
change Tlog → Slog, the formation of Q is likewise functorial with respect to base-change.
We would like to consider what happens to this exact sequence when it is tensored over
(Φ
Xlog/Slog )−1OXF with (ΦXlog/Slog )−1(τXlog/Slog )F .L e t T =( ΦXlog/Slog )∗(τXlog/Slog )F .
We then obtain (by using the long exact cohomology sequence for higher direct images)
the following two exact sequences of sheaves on S:
0 →O
S → R1f∗Q⊗ OX T→ R1f∗ωlog
X/S ⊗OX T
0 → R1f∗(τXlog/Slog )F → R1f∗T→ R1f∗Q⊗ OX T→ 0
where we use the fact that f∗(Q⊗ Φ−1
Xlog/Slog OXF
τF
Xlog/Slog ) ↪→ f∗(ωlog
X/S ⊗OX T )=0
by degree considerations. Now let us note that T has a natural logarithmic connec-
tion ∇ T obtained by declaring the sections of the subsheaf (Φ Xlog/Slog )−1(τXlog/Slog )F ⊆
(ΦXlog/Slog )∗(τXlog/Slog )F = T to be horizontal. Thus, by using the above exact sequences,
we can compute the ﬁrst de Rham cohomology module of T (where we always understand
T to be equipped with the connection ∇ T ).
58

Proposition 1.1. We have an exact sequence:
0 → R1f∗(τXlog/Slog )F → R1fDR,∗(T ) →O S → 0
which is functorial with respect to base-change Tlog → Slog.I np a r t i c u l a r ,R1fDR,∗(T ) is
av e c t o rb u n d l eo fr a n k3g − 2+ r on S. Finally, R1fDR,∗(T ) ⊆ R1f∗(T ).
Let us denote by A the R1f∗(τXlog/Slog )F -torsor on S deﬁned by the above exact
sequence. Let ˜Slog be a ﬁne log scheme whose underlying scheme is ﬂat over Z/p2Z,
and such that ˜Slog ⊗ Z/pZ = Slog.L e t ˜Xlog → ˜Slog be an r-pointed stable curve of
genus g lifting flog. Then for any r-pointed stable curve ˜Y log → ˜Slog of genus g that lifts
(Xlog)F → Slog, we can associate a section θY of A as follows. Consider the obstruction
to lifting the relative Frobenius ΦXlog/Slog : Xlog → (Xlog)F to a morphism ˜Xlog → ˜Y log.
This deﬁnes a section θ′
Y of R1f∗(T ). Observe that θ′
Y is independent of the choice of lifting
˜Xlog. Indeed, this follows from the fact that locally, if one changes the lifting ˜Xlog,t h e
obstruction cocycle will change by a derivation of Xlog applied to a function pulled-back
via ΦXlog/Slog from (Xlog)F . But this will always give zero. This proves that θ′
Y depends
only on ˜Y log. Let us also observe that θ′
Y actually deﬁnes a section of R1fDR,∗(T ) ⊆
R1f∗(T ). Indeed, to see this, we reason as follows. We work with bianalytic functions,
as in Chapter I, §1. Then the inverse image via the relative Frobenius of O(Xbi)F in OXbi
coincides with both iL{(ΦXlog/Slog )−1OXF } and iR{(ΦXlog/Slog )−1OXF }.T h u s , t h e t w o
pull-backs (from the right and left) of θ′
Y to O ˜Xbi both correspond to the obstruction to
lifting iL{(ΦXlog/Slog )−1OXF } = iR{(ΦXlog/Slog )−1OXF } to a O˜S-ﬂat subalgebra (with log
structure) of O ˜Xbi . This shows that θ′
Y is horizontal.
Now suppose that we consider another lifting ˜Zlog → ˜Slog of (Xlog)F → Slog.T h e n
the diﬀerence between the liftings ˜Y log and ˜Zlog naturally deﬁnes a section θYZ of the
vector bundle R1f∗(τXlog/Slog )F . It follows immediately from the deﬁnition of an obstruc-
tion class that θ′
Y = θ′
Z + θYZ . Thus, if there existed a lifting ˜Y log such that θ′
Y is a
section of the subsheaf R1f∗(τXlog/Slog )F ⊆ R1fDR,∗(T ), then it would follow that there
exists another lifting ˜Zlog such that θ′
Z = 0. Thus, the relative Frobenius would lift to a
morphism Ψ : ˜Xlog → ˜Zlog. But then by pull-back, Ψ would induce a nonzero morphism
of (ΦXlog/Slog )∗(ωlog
X/S)F into ωlog
X/S, which, by degree considerations, is absurd. Thus, we
conclude that no θ′
Y lies in R1f∗(τXlog/Slog )F ⊆ R1fDR,∗(T ). In other words, for every
lifting ˜Y log, θY deﬁnes a section of A.L e t D be the R1f∗(τXlog/Slog )F -torsor over S of
liftings of (Xlog)F → Slog to ˜Slog. Then, we see that we have deﬁned a canonical morphism
of R1f∗(τXlog/Slog )F -torsors
F : D→A
Since any morphism of torsors is necessarily an isomorphism, we see that we have proven
the following result: ([Kato], Theorem 4.12 (2))
59

Proposition 1.2. The canonical morphism F : D→A is an isomorphism.
Let (E, ∇ E) be a rank two vector bundle onX with a connection ∇ E (relative to flog).
Suppose that there exists a horizontal exact sequence
0 →T →E→O X → 0
Then this exact sequence deﬁnes a section η of R1fDR,∗(T )o v e rS.
Deﬁnition 1.3. We shall call (E, ∇ E)a nF L-(vector) bundle if ηmaps to O×
S ⊆O S under
the map R1fDR,∗(T ) →O S of Proposition 1.1. We shall call aP1-bundle with connection
(P, ∇P )o n Xlog an FL-(P1)-bundle if it can be written ´etale locally on S as the P1-bundle
associated to an FL-vector bundle.
Remark. The letters “FL” stand for Frobenius lifting. Since a FL-bundle deﬁnes a section
of the torsor A, it follows by Proposition 1.2 that it also deﬁnes a lifting ˜Y log → ˜Slog of
(Xlog)F → Slog. Also, we shall see below (Corollary 1.5) that, at least ifS is reduced,t h e n
if a horizontal exact sequence as above exists, it is necessarily unique.
The p-Curvature of an FL-Bundle
Let us assume for the rest of the Section that p is odd. Throughout this Chapter
the notion of the p-curvature of a bundle with connection in characteristic p will play an
important role. We refer to [Katz], §5,6; [Ogus], §1.2, 1.3 for basic facts concerning the
p-curvature. ([Katz], of course, does not handle the arbitrary “log-smooth” case, but the
deﬁnitions and proofs (of the properties that we will need) go through without change. At
any rate, on the sorts of curves that we are working with, the theory of [Katz], §5,6, is
literally valid on an open, schematically dense subset, and many assertions can be checked
after restriction to such an open subset.) Let ( E, ∇
E) be an FL-bundle. We would like
to compute the p-curvature of ( E, ∇ E). The p-curvature P will be a horizontal section
of T ∨ ⊗OX Ad(E). Occasionally, we shall think of P as a morphism Ad( E) →T ∨ or a
morphism T→ Ad(E) (using the fact that Ad( E) is self-dual). By abuse of notation, we
shall also refer to these morphisms by the notationP. Now, ﬁrst of all, since ∇ E stabilizes
the ﬁltration T⊆ E , by functoriality, P also respects this ﬁltration. Secondly, since T
and OX clearly have p-curvature zero, P not only respects the ﬁltration, but is nilpotent,
i.e., P : T→ Ad(E) maps into the subbundle T⊆ Ad(E) (given by endomorphisms of E
obtained by projecting E→ O X, mapping OX to T , and then injecting T ↪→E ). Thus, P
basically amounts to a morphism from T to T , i.e., a section of f∗OX = OS.
Proposition 1.4. Assume that p is odd. If (E, ∇ E) is an FL-bundle on Xlog,t h e n
P : T→ Ad(E) is given by multiplication T→ T by −1, followed by the inclusion
T ↪→ Ad(E).
60

Proof. Since the universal example of an FL-bundle on anr-pointed stable curve of genus
g is given by the torsorA over Mg,r, which is smooth, it suﬃces to check the assertion after
restriction to a closed point of this universal A. Thus, we can assume that S =S p e c (k),
where k is a ﬁnite ﬁeld. Then S has a canonical lifting to a ﬂat scheme overZ/p2Z,n a m e l y ,
˜S =S p e c (W(k)/p2W(k)) (where W(k) is the ring of Witt vectors with coeﬃcients in k),
and ˜S has a natural Frobenius lifting Φ ˜S. Thus, for any smooth scheme ˜U → ˜S,w em a y
speak of a Frobenius lifting (mod p2) on ˜U,t h a ti s ,a ˜S-linear morphism Φ : ˜U → ˜UF
whose reduction modulo p is the relative Frobenius U → UF of U
def
= ˜U ⊗ Z/pZ.
Now let us take U to be an aﬃne open subset U ⊆ X,a tw h i c hf is smooth, and
which contains no marked points. Let ˜U → ˜S be a smooth lifting of U,a n dl e tt be a
local coordinate on U. By the interpretation of FL-bundles in terms of obstructions to
Frobenius liftings, we may compute E by using as follows: Over U, E|U ∼= T| U ⊕O U .
Let us write sections of E relative to the decomposition T| U ⊕O U and the basis given
by (Φ−1
Xlog/Slog ( d
dt )F ,0); (0,1) ; and let us denote by ∇ the connection ∇ E applied in the
direction d
dt .T h e n∇ is given by adding to the direct sum connection the matrix
( 0 1
p Φ′
00
)
where the map Φ ′ is the derivative (with respect to t) of some local Frobenius liﬁng
Φo n ˜U.S i n c etF ↦→ (1 + t)p − 1 is a Frobenius lifting, Φ( tF ) must be of the form
(1+t)p−1+f(t), for some functionf(t)o nU. Therefore, 1
p Φ′ is of the form (1+t)p−1+f ′(t).
This gives ∇(1,0) = 0; ∇(0,1) = ((1 + t)p−1 + f ′,0). Therefore, ( ∇)p(1,0) = 0 and
∇p(0,1) = (p − 1)!(1,0) (since ( d
dt )p f = 0). Finally, it follows easily from using the fact
that F×
p is a cyclic group that (p − 1)! = −1( i nFp). This completes the proof. ⃝
Corollary 1.5. Assume that p is odd. Let (E, ∇ E) be a rank two vector bundle with
logarithmic connection on Xlog (over Slog) deﬁned by a section η of R1fDR,∗(T ).T h e n
(E, ∇ E) is an FL-bundle if and only if its p-curvature is nonzero at some point of every
ﬁber of f : X → S.
Proof. The “only if” part follows from Proposition 1.4. On the other hand, suppose that
the image of η under the map R1fDR,∗(T ) →O S of Proposition 1.1 vanishes at a point.
By restricting to that point, we may assume that S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld, and that
the image of η in OS vanishes identically. But then, it follows from the exact sequence
of Proposition 1.1 that ( E, ∇ E) is the pull-back of a bundle under Frobenius. Then its
p-curvature must vanish identically, which contradicts our assumption. ⃝
Corollary 1.6. Assume that p is odd and thatS is reduced. Let(E, ∇ E) be an FL-bundle.
Let U ⊆ X be an open subset;(L, ∇ L) be a line bundle with logarithmic connection onUlog;
61

and ι: L ↪→E | U be a horizontal morphism of OU-modules with logarithmic connections.
Then ιfactors through the injection T| U ↪→E | U in the deﬁnition of E as an FL-bundle.
Proof. By shrinking U, we may assume that f : X → S is smooth on U,a n dt h a tU
stays away from the marked points. We may also assume that the composite ofιwith the
projection E|U →O U is an isomorphism. Thus, we obtain a horizontal isomorphism of
line bundles L→O U . But this implies that ( L, ∇ L)h a sp-curvature zero. Thus, we get
a horizontal isomorphism L⊕T| U →E | U . Since the left-hand side has p-curvature zero,
the same is true of the right-hand side. But this contradicts Proposition 1.4. ⃝
Remark. It is not diﬃcult to construct counterexamples to Corollary 1.6 if one does not
assume that S is reduced.
§2. The Verschiebung on Indigenous Bundles
In this Section, we deﬁne a “Verschiebung” morphism on the space Sg,r of Schwarz
structures that takes values in the space of square diﬀerentials (twisted by Frobenius). We
then prove various basic properties of this morphism, such as computing its derivative.
This computation reveals that the derivative looks rather like the Verschiebung morphism
for the Jacobian of the curve, thus justifying the terminology. On the other hand, as
we shall see in §3, unlike the Verschiebung of the Jacobian which only pertains to H
1
of the curve, the Verschiebung on indigenous bundles pertains to a nonabelian invariant
of the curve, namely, the nilpotent indigenous bundles on the curve. It turns out that
the study of nilpotent indigenous bundles, and thus of the Verschiebung on indigenous
bundles are central to understanding uniformization theory in the p-adic context. In this
Section,
Mg,r (respectively, Sg,r) will denote the moduli stack ofr-pointed curves of genus
g (respectively, equipped with a Schwarz structure) over Fp. We assume throughout this
Section that p is odd.
The Deﬁnition of the Verschiebung
Let Slog be a ﬁne noetherian log scheme over Fp.L e t flog : Xlog → Slog be an r-
pointed stable curve of genus g.L e tD ⊆ X be the divisor of marked points. Let ( E, ∇ E)
be an indigenous bundle on Xlog (see §2 of Chapter I for more on such bundles). We
remark here that throughout this paper, when we do various manipulations with indigenous
bundles, it will be simpler to work with vector bundles, rather thanP
1-bundles. Of course,
indigenous vector bundles only exist under certain conditions (cf. Proposition 2.6 of Chap-
ter I), but this will not pose any problem, since we can always either Zariski localize on the
curve, or pass to some sort of covering of the curve, and then descend for the ﬁnal result.
Thus, in the future, for the rest of the paper, we shall act as if this problem does not exist,
and always work with indigenous vector bundles, when it is technically more comfortable
to do so.
62

We maintain the notation of §1 for the various Frobenius morphisms and for T =
(ΦXlog/Slog )∗(τXlog/Slog )F .L e t PE : T→ Ad(E)b et h e p-curvature of (E, ∇ E). Consider
the composite of PE with its dual P∨
E . This composite is a horizontal morphism T→ T ∨,
hence deﬁnes a section of ( f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2)F .L e t VE be − 1
2 times this section. Another way
to put the deﬁnition of VE is as follows: We consider the square (PE)2 :( T )⊗2 → End(E)
of PE, take the trace, and multiply by − 1
2 . Yet another way to put the deﬁnition of VE is
that it is the determinant of PE (regarded as a map (T )⊗2 →O X).
Proposition 2.1. Assume that S is reduced. Then VE is zero if and only if the image of
PE consists of nilpotent endomorphisms of E.
Proof. Immediate from the deﬁnitions. ⃝
Thus, we may think ofVE as a measure of how nilpotentPE is. Note, in particular, that at
a marked point, by deﬁnition ∇ E has nilpotent monodromy, so the p-curvature is already
nilpotent there. Thus, VE has zeroes at all the marked points. By abuse of notation, we
shall denote by VE the resulting section of (f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D))F .
Deﬁnition 2.2. We shall refer to the section VE of (f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D))F as the Ver-
schiebung of the indigenous bundle (E, ∇ E).
Thus, in the universal case, whenflog : Clog → M
log
g,r is the universalr-pointed stable curve
of genus g, we obtain a morphism of Mg,r-schemes:
Vg,r : Sg,r → Qg,r
where Qg,r is the geometric vector bundle corresponding to (i.e., Spec of the symmetric
algebra of thedual of) (f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D))F . Note that both Sg,r and Qg,r are of dimension
3g−3+r over Mg,r. The rest of this Chapter will be devoted to studying thisVerschiebung
morphism Vg,r.
Let us begin with some observations concerning the degree of Vg,r as a polynomial
map. Let ∇ ′
E = ∇ E + θ be a logarithmic connection on E that makes it an indigenous
bundle; here we may assume thatθis an Ad(E)-valued diﬀerential which deﬁnes a square-
nilpotent endomorphism of E and which corresponds to a square diﬀerential θSD.T h u s ,
θ2 = 0. If we then compute the p-curvature of (E, ∇ ′
E) by, say, working locally on U ⊆
X where there is a local coordinate x, and letting ∇ (respectively, ∇ ′; θx) denote ∇ E
(respectively, ∇ ′
E; θ) applied in the direction ∂
def
= d
dx , we note that because θ2
x =0 ,a l lt h e
terms that involve θx more than 1
2 (p + 1) times must vanish. Moreover, there is only one
term that involves θx exactly 1
2 (p + 1) times, namely:
63

θx ∇ θx ∇ ... ∇ θx
that is, alternating θx’s and ∇’s, with a total of 1
2 (p + 1) copies of θx and 1
2 (p − 1) copies
of ∇. For future reference let us call this term ξ. Note that since θ2
x =0 ,a n ys t r i n g
θx ∇ θx can be rewritten θx [∇,θx] (where the brackets denote the commutator), and
that this commutator [∇,θx]i sa linear operator (that is, linear over OX). Moreover, this
linear operator [∇,θx] preserves the Hodge ﬁltration of E.T h u s ,ξmay be rewritten as θx
times [∇,θx] to some power. Since [ ∇,θx] preserves the Hodge ﬁltration, it thus follows
that ξis a linear operator on E which is nilpotent with respect to the Hodge ﬁltration. In
particular, ξ2 = 0. At any rate, we may at least conclude that in the expression for the
trace of the square of the p-curvature of ∇ ′
E, θoccurs no more than p times in each term.
We thus obtain the following result:
(*) Relative to the aﬃne structures of Sg,r and Qg,r, the pull-backs of
the aﬃne variables on Qg,r via the morphism Vg,r are polynomials in
the aﬃne variables of Sg,r of degree ≤ p.
In fact, we would like to conclude a stronger result, namely that the degree is exactly
p. In order to do this, we need to enlist the aid of Jacobson’s formula (see, e.g., [Jac],
pp. 186-187): This formula states that if a and b are elements of an associative ring R of
characteristic p,t h e n
(a + b)p = ap + bp +
p−1∑
i=1
si(a, b)
where the si(a, b) are given by the formula:
(ad(ta + b))p−1(a)=
p−1∑
i=1
isi(a, b)ti−1
computed in the ring R[t], where t is an indeterminate. In our case, we let b = ∇ and
a = θx, and we wish to compute the sj(a, b), where j = 1
2 (p − 1). Let η be the coeﬃcient
multiplying tj−1 in the expression (ad(ta+b))p−1(a). Let α =a d (a); β =a d (b). Then the
terms in ηlook like 1
2 (p − 3) copies of α and 1
2 (p+1) copies of β applied to a in some order.
Now ultimately, in order to compute the Verschiebung, we are interested in computing
tr(η·ξ). Let τ be one of the terms that make upη. Now we separate the analysis ofτ into
two cases: the case where τ begins with an α, and the case where τ begins with a β.
Suppose that τ begins with an α.T h u s ,τ looks like
αγ
1 ... γp−2 a
64

where each γi is either α or β. Now let us note that when one applies α =a d (θx)o r
β =a d (∇) to a linear operator on E, one gets back a linear operator. Moreover, α applied
to any linear operator on E yields a linear operator that preserves the Hodge ﬁltration on
E. Thus, we conclude that τ is a linear operator on E that preserves the Hodge ﬁltration.
Since ξis nilpotent with respect to the Hodge ﬁltration, it thus follows that tr( τ · ξ)=0 .
Now suppose that τ begins with a β:
βγ1 ... γp−2 a
Let us denote by σ the linear operator on E given by γ1 ... γp−2 a (i.e., we leave oﬀ the
initial β). We would like to show that σ preserves the Hodge ﬁltration on E. To see this,
ﬁrst note that among the γi’s, the number ofβ’s is exactly one greater than the number of
α’s. Also, note that (by Griﬃths transversality) relative to the Hodge ﬁltration on Ad(E),
applying β decreases the ﬁltration index l (in Fl(Ad(E))) by at most one, while applying
α always increases the ﬁltration index l by one. Thus, since a = θx ∈ F1(Ad(E)), it
follows that σ ∈ F0(Ad(E)), i.e., it ﬁxes the Hodge ﬁltration on E,a n ds oσ · ξis nilpotent
with respect to the Hodge ﬁltration. In particular, tr( σ · ξ) = 0. Since the trace map is
horizontal, we thus obtain that tr([∇,σ · ξ]) = 0. Therefore, when we multiply τ = β(σ)
by ξand take the trace, we get
tr(τ · ξ) = tr([∇,σ · ξ]) − tr(σ · [∇,ξ])
= −tr(σ · [∇,ξ])
In other words, tr(τ · ξ) depends only on the images of σ and [∇,ξ]i n F0/F1(Ad(E)).
To compute the image of σ in F0/F1(Ad(E)), we must analyze σ in greater detail.
Now we saw that when we computeσ by applyingα’s andβ’s toa, β decreases the ﬁltration
index by at most one. The only time it fails to decrease the ﬁltration index by one is when
it is applied to a linear operator which already has a nontrivial image inF −1/F0(Ad(E)).
If this should occur even once, then the net change in the ﬁltration index as a result of
applying all the γ
i’s (in the computation of σ)t o a is ≤ 0. Thus, if this occurs even once,
σ ∈ F1(Ad(E)), so tr(σ · [∇,ξ]) = 0. On the other hand, if, during the calculation ofσ,w e
apply α to a linear operator in F1(Ad(E)), we get zero. Let us call the case where neither
of these two phenomena ever occurs thenondegenerate case. Thus, only the nondegenerate
terms τ will make a nonzero contribution.
Let us suppose that τ is nondegenerate. Then in order to compute the image of σ in
F0/F1(Ad(E)), it suﬃces to merely keep track of the leading term (relative to the Hodge
ﬁltration on Ad( E)) as we apply the various γi’s. Now let us note that it follows from
the fact that the Kodaira-Spencer morphism for the Hodge ﬁltration on E is the identity
that if l ≥ 1, then applying β to a linear operator L in Fl(Ad(E)) yields a linear operator
in Fl−1(Ad(E)) whose image in Fl−1/Fl(Ad(E)) is the image of L in Fl/Fl+1(Ad(E))
times ∂. On the other hand, if l ≤ 1, then applying α to a linear operator L in FlAd(E)
yields a linear operator in Fl+1(Ad(E)) whose image in Fl+1/Fl+2(Ad(E)) is the image
65

of L in Fl/Fl+1(Ad(E)) times θSD · ∂.T h u s , i fτ is nondegenerate, then its contribution
−tr(σ · [∇,ξ]) is given by (θSD · ∂)p · (∂)p.
It remains to compute the number of nondegenerate termsτ. Let us call this number
Np, and regard it as an element of Fp. We are interested in whether or not Np ∈ Fp is
zero. Although one can presumably computeNp explicitly using some sort of combinatorial
argument, we prefer to take the following approach. Note that Np does not depend on
g or r or on the particular curve flog : Xlog → Slog, but only on p. Thus, it suﬃces to
show that (for each odd primep) Np ̸= 0 for one particular curve (withg and r arbitrary).
We shall do this in §3 when we do various computations with elliptic curves. Thus, we
obtain that VE (which is a section of (f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D))F ), when applied to (∂F )2 yields
the function c · (θSD · ∂)p · (∂)p,w h e r ec ∈ F×
p . Put another way, the degree p component
of Vg,r is a morphism:
V
[p]
g,r : {(f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D))∨}F → Sp(f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D))∨
which is equal to c times the Frobenius morphism, i.e., the pth-power map. We shall see
later in our computations with elliptic curves that c = −1. Thus, we thus obtain the
following important result:
Theorem 2.3. Relative to the aﬃne structures of Sg,r and Qg,r, the pull-backs of the
aﬃne variables on Qg,r via the morphism Vg,r are polynomials in the aﬃne variables of
Sg,r of degree exactly p, with the leading term V
[p]
g,r (i.e., the degree p component) given
by −1 times the pth-power map. In particular, Vg,r is a ﬁnite, ﬂat morphism of degree
p3g−3+r.
Proof. It remains to verify the last assertion (thatVg,r is ﬁnite and ﬂat of the right degree).
Let U =S p e c (A) → Mg,r be ´etale. Then over U, we may choose aﬃne coordinates Xi
and Yj of Sg,r and Qg,r so that Vg,r looks like (the map induced on Spec’s by):
B
def
= A[Y1,... ,Y3g−3+r] → C
def
= A[X1,... ,X3g−3+r]
where Yi ↦→ fi(X1,... ,X3g−3+r), and fi is of the form “ −Xp
i plus terms of lower degree.”
Then it is easy to see that, as a B-module, C is generated by monomials of the form
3g−3+r∏
i=1
Xei
i
where 0 ≤ ei ≤ p − 1. In particular, C is a ﬁnite B-module, so Vg,r is ﬁnite. Since Vg,r is
a ﬁnite morphism between regular algebraic stacks of the same dimension, it follows from
commutative algebra that
Vg,r is ﬂat. To compute the degree of Vg,r,l e tP =P r o jA(C[T])
66

(with the grading such that T and the Xi’s have degree one). Then Spec( C) ⊆ P is an
aﬃne open subset. Let Si ⊆ P be the hypersurface which is the closure of the zero
locus of fi. Then the scheme-theoretic intersection V of all the Si’s has degree p3g−3+r
over Spec(A). Also, the intersection of V with P − Spec(C)= V+(T)=P r o j (C) is just
V+(Xp
1 ,... ,X p
3g−3+r) ⊆ Proj(C), which is the empty set. Thus, V ⊆ Spec(C), and so
deg(Vg,r)=d e g (V → Spec(A)) = p3g−3+r. ⃝
Before continuing, we introduce some more terminology that will be of use in the
future:
Deﬁnition 2.4. Let (E, ∇ E) be an indigenous bundle on Xlog. Then, we will say that
(E, ∇ E)i s nilpotent if VE is zero. We will say that (E, ∇ E)i s admissible if P∨
E :A d (E) →T ∨
is surjective.
Note that the terminology of a “nilpotent indigenous bundle” that we have introduced
here is (by Proposition 2.1) consistent with that of [Katz]. Also, let us observe that the
nilpotent bundles form a closed subscheme
Ng,r ⊆ Sg,r
while the admissible bundles form an open subscheme
S
adm
g,r ⊆ Sg,r
We shall see later in this Chapter thatS
adm
g,r
⋂ Ng,r is nonempty and that neitherS
adm
g,r
nor
Ng,r is contained in the other. Note, further, that Theorem 2.3 implies that the natural
morphism
Ng,r → Mg,r
is ﬁnite and ﬂat of degree p3g−3+r.
Finally, we observe that one thing which is interesting about nilpotent indigenous
bundles is that (if S is the spectrum of a perfect ﬁeld, then) by a result of [Falt] such
indigenous bundles arise as the crystalline Dieudonn´e modules of certain ﬁnite, ﬂat group
schemes on Xlog. This point of view will be pursued further in later chapters. This
observation is the main reason for studyingNg,r and Vg,r, which is the goal of the present
Chapter.
67

The p-Curvature of an Admissible Indigenous Bundle
As a pr´elude to ﬁnding out more about Vg,r, it is worth looking at various basic
properties of the p-curvature of an admissible indigenous bundle.
Proposition 2.5. There is a bijective correspondence between nilpotent, admissible in-
digenous bundles (up to tensor product with a line bundle of order two) and FL-bundles
whose projectivizations are indigenous given as follows: If (E, ∇ E) is a nilpotent, admissi-
ble indigenous bundle on Xlog,l e tPE : T→ Ad(E) be its p-curvature. Then the kernel of
P∨
E :A d (E) →T ∨ is an FL-bundle.
Moreover, if (E, ∇ E) is a nilpotent, admissible indigenous bundle onXlog,t h e r ee x i s t s
a unique rank one subbundleM⊆E that is annihilated by the endomorphisms in the image
of PE. This subbundle M is stabilized by ∇ E. The induced connection∇ M has p-curvature
zero, and we have a horizontal isomorphism M⊗2 ∼= T .
Finally, suppose that S is reduced, and (E, ∇ E) is nilpotent, admissible, and indige-
nous. Let U ⊆ X be an open set, and (L, ∇ L) a line bundle with logarithmic connection
(with respect to flog : Xlog → Slog)o n U.L e t ι: L→E | U be a horizontal morphism.
Then ιfactors through M⊆E .
Proof. First of all, since ( E, ∇ E) is admissible, P∨
E is surjective, and thus its kernel is a
rank two vector bundle F which is stabilized by ∇ E, hence gets a connection ∇ F .S i n c e
(E, ∇ E) is nilpotent, it follows that T ∼= Im(PE) ⊆F , and that this inclusion T ↪→F
is locally split. Also, this inclusion T ↪→F is necessarily horizontal, and we also have a
horizontal isomorphism F/T ∼= OX. Thus, in order to show that (F, ∇ F ) is an FL-bundle,
it suﬃces to show that the p-curvature of (F, ∇ F ) is nonzero generically on every ﬁber of
f : X → S (by Corollary 1.5). Thus, we may assume that S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld.
Now on some nonempty open set U ⊆ X, there is line bundle with connection ( L, ∇ L)
and a horizontal surjectionμ : E→L such that Im(PE |U ) is given by endomorphisms that
vanish on Ker(μ) and whose image is in Ker(μ). Then sorting through what we have done,
we see that we have a horizontal isomorphism F|U ∼= E|U ⊗L −1.S i n c eL has p-curvature
zero, the fact that E|U has nonzero p-curvature implies that the same is true of F|U .T h i s
completes the proof that (F, ∇ F ) is an FL-bundle.
On the other hand, if we are given an FL-bundle ( F, ∇ F ) whose projectivization
(P, ∇P ) is indigenous, let (E, ∇ E) be an indigenous vector bundle whose projectivization is
(P, ∇P ). Then there exists a line bundle with connection (L, ∇ L) (relative toflog : Xlog →
Slog) such that we have a horizontal isomorphism F⊗ OX L ∼= E. Taking determinants,
we thus get a horizontal isomorphism L⊗2 ∼= T ∨,s ot h e p-curvature of L must be zero.
Thus, under the natural identiﬁcation of Ad( F)w i t hA d (E), we see that the p-curvatures
of (E, ∇ E)a n d(F, ∇ F ) coincide. Thus, by our computation in Proposition 1.4, (E, ∇ E)i s
admissible and nilpotent. Also, it is easy to see that these two procedures are inverse to
one another, thus proving the bijective correspondence. We take M⊆E to be T⊗ L ⊆
68

F⊗ L ∼= E. The remaining assertions follow immediately from what we have done so far,
plus Proposition 1.6. ⃝
Proposition 2.6. Let (E, ∇ E) be an indigenous bundle on Xlog.L e tPE : T→ Ad(E) be
its p-curvature. Then:
(1) We shall call the composite HE : T→ τXlog/Slog of PE with the pro-
jection E→ τXlog/Slog arising from the Hodge ﬁltration on E the square
Hasse invariant of(E, ∇ E).I f (E, ∇ E) is admissible, thenHE is nonzero.
(2) Suppose that (E, ∇ E) is admissible. Then the zero locus V (HE) ⊆ X is
a divisor DE which is ﬁnite, ﬂat, and of degree (p − 1)(2g − 2+ r) over
S. We shall call it the double supersingular divisor of (E, ∇ E).
(3) Suppose that the indigenous bundle(E, ∇ E) is admissible and nilpotent.
Then there exists a line bundleH on X whose square H⊗2 is isomorphic
to T ∨ ⊗ τXlog/Slog , together with a section χ of H over X whose square
is HE. We shall call χ the Hasse invariant of (E, ∇ E).I n p a r t i c u l a r ,
there exists a divisor EE ⊆ X such that DE =2 EE. We shall call EE
the supersingular divisor of (E, ∇ E).
(4) Suppose that S is reduced. Then any two nilpotent, admissible indige-
nous bundles with the same supersingular locus are isomorphic.
Proof. For (1), it suﬃces to prove the statement after we restrict to a ﬁber off : X → S;
thus, we may assume that S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld. If HE were zero, then that would
mean that Im(PE) lands in F0(Ad(E)). Now F0(Ad(E)) surjects onto OX. If the image
of PE in OX is nontrivial, we get a contradication as follows: On the one hand, Im( PE)
is stabilized by ∇ E. On the other hand, the fact that the Kodaira-Spencer morphism of
the Hodge ﬁltration is an isomorphism means that ∇ E applied to Im( PE) will not be in
F0(Ad(E)). If the image of PE in OX is trivial, then it must lie in F1(Ad(E)) ∼= ωlog
X/S.
Then, by using the fact that the Kodaira-Spencer morphism is an isomorphism, we again
get a contradiction. Assertion (2) follows immediately from (1).
Now suppose that (E, ∇ E) is nilpotent, admissible, and indigenous. Let M⊆E be the
rank one subbundle of Proposition 2.5. LetE→N be the surjection arising from the Hodge
ﬁltration. Then composing the injection M ↪→E with this surjection, we get a morphism
χ : M→N , whose square (under the identiﬁcations M⊗2 ∼= T ; N ⊗2 ∼= τXlog/Slog )i se q u a l
to the Hasse invariant. Thus, if we let EE be the zero locus of χ,w eh a v eDE =2 EE.
This proves (3).
To prove (4), we assume that S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld, and that we have two
connections ∇ E and ∇ ′
E on E,b o t ho fw h i c hm a k eE a nilpotent, admissible indigenous
bundle, and such that the respective supersingular divisorsEE and E′
E coincide. Let us also
69

assume that ∇ ′
E = ∇ E +θ,w h e r eθis a square diﬀerential. Letι: M→E and ι′ : M′ →E
be the respective inclusions, and χ : M→N and χ′ : M′ →N the respective composites
discussed in the preceding paragraph. We claim ﬁrst of all thatM and M′ are isomorphic.
Indeed, this follows from the fact that N⊗ M −1 ∼= OX(EE)= OX(E′
E) ∼= N⊗ (M′)−1.
Thus, we shall henceforth identify M and M′.N o w χ and χ′ diﬀer by multiplication by
a section λ of OS,t h a ti s ,χ = λ · χ′.L e t i1 : M→E be ι,a n dl e ti2 : M→E be ι′
multiplied by λ. Then it follows that there exists a morphism α : M→ F1(E) such that
i1 = i2 + α.N o w l e ts be a horizontal section of M (over some open set U ⊆ X). Since
the p-curvature is a horizontal morphism, ∇ E(i1(s)) = 0 and ∇ ′
E(i2(s)) = 0. Thus, we
compute:
∇ ′
E(i2(s)) = (∇ E + θ)(i1(s)+ α(s))
= ∇ E(α(s)) +θ(i1(s))
Suppose that α is nonzero. Then in the last line, the ﬁrst term has a nonzero image under
the surjection E→N (since the Kodaira-Spencer morphism is an isomorphism), while
the second term lies in F1(E). Since the sum of these terms is zero, we thus obtain a
contradiction. Thus, α must be zero. Then we obtain that θ(i1(s)) = 0, so (ifθ ̸= 0, then)
i1 maps into F1(E) ⊆E .B u tt h e nχ = 0, so by (2), we again obtain a contradiction. This
completes the proof of (4). ⃝
Proposition 2.7. Suppose that S is reduced. Let (E, ∇ E) be admissible indigenous on
Xlog.L e t PE : T→ Ad(E) be the p-curvature. Let U ⊆ X be open, and let (L, ∇ L) be a
line bundle with logarithmic connection (relative to flog)o n U whose p-curvature is zero.
Let ι: L→ Ad(E) be a horizontal morphism. Then ιfactors through T ∼= Im(PE).
Proof. By shrinkingU, we may assume thatL and T| U have horizontal generating sections
s and t, respectively. We may assume that s and t generate a subbundle G⊆ Ad(E)|U of
rank two. If we take their commutator in Ad(E), we see that [s, t]m u s tb ei nG. Indeed, if
this were not the case, then the p-curvature of Ad(E) would be zero. But the p-curvature
of Ad(E)i sg i v e nb yAd(PE) which is nonzero everywhere since (E, ∇ E) is admissible. This
proves the claim. Thus, G is a Lie subalgebra of Ad( E), stabilized by the connection on
Ad(E) and whose p-curvature is zero. Being of rank two, it is necessarily solvable, hence
contains a nilpotent subalgebra K⊆G which is stabilized by the connection on Ad( E)
and has p-curvature zero. Now K deﬁnes a horizontal ﬁltration N⊆ E | U with respect
to which it is nilpotent. Since ( N)⊗2 ∼= K, it follows that N has p-curvature zero. Let
δ: End(E|U ) → Ad(E)|U be the canonical projection given by quotienting out by the scalar
endomorphisms. Then clearly the image of N⊗ E | U ⊆ End(E|U ) (i.e., the endomorphisms
that anihilate N⊆ E | U ) under δ is equal to G.S i n c eG and N have p-curvature zero,
it thus follows that E|U has p-curvature zero, which contradicts the fact that ( E, ∇ E)i s
admissible. ⃝
Proposition 2.8. Suppose that flog is obtained by gluing together various flog
i ,a si n
70

the last subsection of Chapter I, §2. Suppose that (E, ∇ E) is nilpotent, admissible, and
indigenous on Xlog. Then it is automatically of restrictable type.
Proof. The subbundle M⊆E (of Proposition 2.5) is stabilized by E and has p-curvature
zero. Thus, if we restrict to an irreducible componentXlog
i , the monodromy at any marked
point of Xlog
i must be nilpotent with respect to the ﬁltration deﬁned by M⊆E .T h i s
completes the proof. ⃝
As mentioned earlier, the reason that we are interested in nilpotent, admissible indige-
nous bundles is that they deﬁne MF∇ -objects in the sense of [Falt]. Let us suppose that
S =S p e c (k), where k is a perfect ﬁeld, and that f : X → S is smooth.L e t ˜S =S p e c (A),
where A = W(k)/p2W(k), and W(k) is the ring of Witt vectors with coeﬃcients in k.L e t
us denote by ΦA the canonical Frobenius morphism on ˜S. We suppose that S and ˜S are
endowed with the trivial log structures, and call the resulting log schemes Slog and ˜Slog,
respectively. Let ˜flog : ˜Xlog → ˜Slog b eas m o o t hr-pointed curve of genus g that lifts flog.
Let (E, ∇ E) be an indigenous bundle on Xlog.L e t ˜E = F1(E) ⊕ (E/F1(E)). Let ˜U ⊆ ˜X be
an open subset, and let Φlog : ˜Ulog → ˜Ulog be a lifting of Frobenius. If e is a section of E,
let ∇Φ
E (e) be the section of Φ ∗(E/F1(E)) ⊗ ωUlog/Slog obtained by applying ∇ E to e (and
regarding the result modulo F1(E) ⊗ ωUlog/Slog ) to get a section of (E/F1(E)) ⊗ ωUlog/Slog ,
then pulling back by Φ on E and by 1
p dΦo n ωUlog/Slog . Then we can deﬁne a logarithmic
connection ∇Φ on Φ ∗( ˜EF ) by letting ∇Φ(Φ−1(0,eF )) = 0 (if e is a section of E/F1(E))
and ∇Φ(Φ−1(eF ,0)) = (0, ∇Φ
E (e)) (if e is a section of F1(E)). Then, it is easy to see (as
in [Falt], §2) that for diﬀerent Φ, the pairs (Φ∗( ˜EF )|˜U , ∇Φ) glue together to form a bundle
with connection F∗(E, ∇ E)o n Xlog. Note that F∗(E, ∇ E) depends on the choice of lifting
˜Xlog → ˜Slog.
Deﬁnition 2.9. We shall say that (E, ∇ E) forms an MF∇ -object on Xlog if
(E, ∇ E) ⊗ (L, ∇ L) ∼= F∗(E, ∇ E)
for some choice of lifting ˜Xlog → ˜Slog and some line bundle with connection (L, ∇ L)w h o s e
square is trivial.
Note that this deﬁnition is consistent (though slightly weaker, since we allow the ambiguity
of tensoring with (L, ∇ L)) with the notion of being an object of the categoryMF∇ of [Falt],
§2. It is shown in [Falt] (Theorem 6.2) that the de Rham cohomology of a semistable family
of varieties overXlog equipped with the Hodge ﬁltration and the Gauss-Manin connection
forms an object of MF∇ (as long asp− 2 is greater than or equal to the relative dimension
of the family of varieties). The following result provides the link between what we are doing
here and [Falt], §2:
71

Proposition 2.10. Let (E, ∇ E) be an indigenous bundle on Xlog.T h e n(E, ∇ E) forms an
MF∇ -object on Xlog if and only if (E, ∇ E) is admissible and nilpotent.
Proof. First, let us assume that ( E, ∇ E) forms an MF∇ -object on Xlog for the lifting
˜Xlog → ˜Slog. One computes easily from the deﬁnition of the connection ∇Φ that the p-
curvature is nilpotent (with respect to the ﬁltration 0 ⊕ (Φ∗E/F1(E)) ⊆ Φ∗˜E). Also, (just
as in the proof of Proposition 1.4), the derivative 1
p Φ′ is of the form (1 + t)p−1 + f ′(t).
Thus, since the Kodaira-Spencer morphism is the identity, it follows that the p-curvature
(applied to ∂
def
= d/dt) is obtained by multiplying a section of (Φ∗F1(E)) ⊕ 0b yΦ −1(∂F )
times the (p − 1)th derivative of (1 + t)p−1 + f ′(t) (which is just −1) and regarding the
result of this multiplication as a section of 0⊕ (Φ∗E/F1(E)). In particular, we see that the
p-curvature is nonzero. Thus, (E, ∇ E) is admissible and nilpotent.
On the other hand, suppose that (E, ∇ E) is admissible and nilpotent. By the bijective
correspondence of Proposition 2.5, ( E, ∇ E) corresponds to an FL-bundle ( G, ∇ G). By
Proposition 1.2, this FL-bundle corresponds to a lifting ˜Xlog → ˜Slog. It remains to see
that F∗(E, ∇ E) taken with respect to this lifting is isomorphic to (E, ∇ E) (up to tensoring
with an ( L, ∇ L) whose square is trivial). Let N = E/F1(E). Let M =Φ ∗
X/S(NF ).
Let ∇ M be the connection on M for which the sections of NF are horizontal. Thus,
(M, ∇ M)⊗2 ∼= (T , ∇ T ). Now, sorting through the deﬁnitions and using the fact that the
Kodaira-Spencer morphism is the identity reveals that if X = U ⋃V (where U and V
are aﬃne opens), then F∗(E, ∇ E) ⊗ (M, ∇ M) is just the extension of OX by T obtained
from the 1-cocycle which is the diﬀerence between Frobenius liftings on U and V .I tt h u s
follows from the deﬁnition of the canonical morphism F : D→A of Proposition 1.2 that
F∗(E, ∇ E) ⊗ (M, ∇ M) is exactly the bundle (G, ∇ G). Thus, it follows from the deﬁnition
of the bijective correspondence in Proposition 2.5 that F∗(E, ∇ E) ∼= (E, ∇ E) ⊗ (L, ∇ L)f o r
some (L, ∇ L) whose square is trivial. ⃝
The Inﬁnitesimal Verschiebung
Let ωX/S be the relative dualizing sheaf off : X → S.T h u s ,i fD ⊆ X is the divisor of
marked points, we have ωX/S(D) ∼= ωlog
X/S.L e tΦ X/S : X → XF be the relative Frobenius
over S. Recall from duality theory (see, e.g., [Harts] for a treatment of duality theory) that
since f and ΦX/S are local complete intersection morphisms, we have a trace morphism:
trΦX/S :( ΦX/S)∗ωX/S → (ωX/S)F
where we regard ωX/S as RΦ!
X/S(ωX/S)F . On the other hand, let Y log be the log scheme
whose underlying scheme is X and whose log structure is the same as that of Xlog away
from the divisor D of marked points, and equal to the pull-back of the log structure ofSlog
on the open subscheme where f is smooth. Then we also have a morphism arising from
the log version of the Cartier isomorphism (applied to Y log → Slog):
72

C :( ΦX/S)∗ωX/S → (ωX/S)F
The following result is “well-known,” but I do not know an adequate reference for it:
Lemma 2.11. The morphisms trΦX/S and C are equal.
Proof. By a density argument, we reduce to the case where f is smooth. By naturality,
we reduce to the assertion that these two morphisms are the same whenX =S p e c (Fp[T]);
S =S p e c (Fp)( w h e r eT is an indeterminate). Since tr ΦX/S is the reduction modulo p of
a construction that holds in arbitrary or mixed characteristic, we can calculate trΦX/S by
considering the trace map obtained from duality for the ﬁnite morphism Φ : Spec(Zp[T]) →
Spec(Zp[T]) given by T → Tp.S i n c e t rΦ(Φ∗(dT)) = pd T ,a n dΦ ∗(dT)= pT p−1dT,i t
follows that trΦ(Tp−1dT)= dT. By reducing this formula modulo p and comparing with
the construction in [Katz] of the Cartier isomorphism, we obtain the desired result. ⃝
Let (E, ∇ E) be an indigenous bundle on Xlog.L e tHE : T→ τXlog/Slog be the square
Hasse invariant of (E, ∇ E). Then by pulling back via Φ Xlog/Slog and taking R1f∗ of HE,
we obtain a canonical morphism:
Φτ
E :( R1f∗τXlog/Slog )F → R1f∗τXlog/Slog
which we shall call the Frobenius on R1f∗τXlog/Slog induced by (E, ∇ E). On the other
hand, let us consider the dual morphism to HE,t h a ti s ,H∨
E : ωlog
X/S →T ∨. Note that
T ∨ =Φ ∗
X/S(ωlog
X/S)F .T h u s ,i fw et e n s o rH∨
E with ωX/S, we get a morphism
(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D) → ωX/S ⊗OX Φ∗
X/S(ωlog
X/S)F
If we then compose this morphism with the trace morphism trΦX/S tensored with (ωlog
X/S)F ,
we obtain a morphism (ΦX/S)∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D) → ((ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D))F . Then applying f∗ to
this morphism, we obtain:
Φω
E : f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D) → (f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D))F
which we shall call the Verschiebung on f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D) induced by (E, ∇ E). Observe
that by Serre duality applied to the morphism f, we obtain that the vector bundles
f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D)a n dR1f∗τXlog/Slog on S are dual to one another. Then relative to this
duality, we have
Proposition 2.12. The morphisms Φω
E and Φτ
E are dual to one another.
73

Proof. This follows immediately from duality theory. Namely, the duality between
f∗ω⊗2
X/S(−D)a n dR1f∗τXlog/Slog is obtained by cup product, followed by the trace mor-
phism trf : R1f∗ωX/S →O S. On the other hand, since trace morphisms behave well
under composition, we see that tr f = (trf )F ◦trΦX/S . This fact, combined with the fact
that Φτ
E (respectively, Φω
E
) is obtained from HE (respectively, H∨
E ), implies the result. ⃝
We are now ready to state and prove the second main result of this Section. Consider the
Verschiebung on indigenous bundles deﬁned in the ﬁrst subsection of this Section. In the
universal case, it was a morphism
Vg,r : Sg,r → Qg,r
over Mg,r. Thus, it induces a map on tangent bundles over Mg,r:
Θ Vg,r /Mg,r
:Θ Sg,r /Mg,r
→ Θ Qg,r /Mg,r
If we pull-back to the point of Sg,r deﬁned by our particular ( E, ∇ E), we get a morphism
Θ V
E : f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D) → (f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D))F
Then we have the following result:
Theorem 2.13. Let (E, ∇ E) be indigenous on Xlog. Then the inﬁnitesimal Verschiebung
morphism Θ V
E is equal to Φω
E .
Proof. First, let us recall Jacobson’s formula(see, e.g., [Jac], pp. 186-187): This formula
states that if a and b are elements of an associative ring R of characteristic p,t h e n
(a + b)p = ap + bp +
p−1∑
i=1
si(a, b)
where the si(a, b) are given by the formula:
(ad(ta + b))p−1(a)=
p−1∑
i=1
isi(a, b)ti−1
computed in the ring R[t], where t is an indeterminate. In our case, we wish to apply this
formula in the case where a = ϵα , α ∈ R,a n dϵ is an element of the center ofR such that
ϵ2 = 0. In this case, substitution yields:
74

(a + b)p = bp +( a d (b))p−1a
To prove that Θ V
E =Φ ω
E
, it suﬃces to do a local calculation on X to show that the
inﬁnitesimal change in the trace of the square of the p-curvature is given by −2Φ ω
E .W e
work over the baseS[ϵ]/(ϵ2). Let ∇ ′
E = ∇ E +ϵθ,w h e r eθis a section of f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D),
be a connection on E that makes it an indigenous bundle. Let U ⊆ X be an open subset
that avoids the marked points and at whichf is smooth. Let x be a local coordinate on U.
Write ∇ (respectively, ∇ ′; θx)f o r∇ E (respectively, ∇ ′
E; θ) applied in the direction∂
def
= d
dx .
We wish to apply the above formula in the case where b = ∇ and a = ϵθ x.W e t h u s
obtain that the inﬁnitesimal change in the p-curvature is given by (ad(∇))p−1θx.N o wt h e
inﬁnitesimal Verschiebung is obtained by multiplying this term by the constant term and
then taking the trace (and multiplying by −1). Put another way, minus the inﬁnitesimal
Verschiebung is obtained by applying P
∨
E to (ad( ∇))p−1θx.S i n c eP∨
E is horizontal,i t
commutes with ad(∇), so we ﬁnd that:
(∂)p−1(P∨
E θx)=( ∂)p−1((P∨
E θ) · ∂)
is the section of Φ∗
X/S(ωlog
X/S)F obtained by evaluating minus the inﬁnitesimal Verschiebung
(which is a section of Φ ∗
X/S {((ωlog
X/S)⊗2)(−D)}F )a t ∂F . Thus, to complete the proof of
the Theorem, we must show that
(∂)p−1((P∨
E θ) · ∂)= −Φ−1
X/S {(C ⊗ 1)(P∨
E θ) · ∂F }
Now let ζ be a horizontal, locally generating section of Φ ∗
X/S(ωlog
X/S)F .W r i t eP∨
E θ= ν · ζ,
where ν is a section of ωX/S. Substituting, we see that it suﬃces to show that:
(∂)p−1(ν · ∂) · ζ= −Φ−1
X/S(C(ν) · ∂F ) · ζ
If we then divide out the ζ’s, we see that really (just as in [Katz2], (7.1.2.6)), we are
reduced to proving a simple identity concerning diﬀerentiation in characteristicp. Indeed,
if we regard the equation as an identity in ν, both sides are Φ −1
X/S OXF -linear in ν and
vanish when ν is exact; thus, we are reduced to proving the identity:
(∂)p−1(xp−1)= −C(xp−1dx) · ∂F
which follows from the deﬁnition of C and the fact that (p − 1)! = −1 in characteristic p.
⃝
75

Diﬀerential Criterion for Admissibility
We maintain the notation of the previous subsection. In the previous subsection, we
computed the relative diﬀerential map of the Verschiebung morphism Vg,r over Mg,r.I n
fact, however, with a little more preparation, the same calculation allows us to give an
explicit representation of the diﬀerential map of the Verschiebung overFp.M o r e o v e r ,t h i s
explicit representation allows us to give a diﬀerential criterion for an indigenous bundle to
be admissible, which is also necessary if the bundle is nilpotent.
Consider the aﬃne bundle
Qg,r → Mg,r. Since by deﬁnition, this bundle is the pull
back by the Frobenius morphism on Mg,r of a bundle over Mg,r, it follows that we get
a natural connection ∇ Q on this aﬃne bundle Qg,r → Mg,r.L e t Q
log
g,r be the log stack
obtained by pulling back to Qg,r the log structure of M
log
g,r. N e x t ,l e tu sc o n s i d e rt h e
canonical exact sequence of tangent bundles on Qg,r:
0 → Θ Qg,r /Mg,r
→ Θ Q
log
g,r
→ Θ M
log
g,r
|Qg,r
→ 0
Thus, our connection ∇ Q induces a splitting
Θ Q
log
g,r
∼= Θ Qg,r /Mg,r
⊕ Θ M
log
g,r
|Qg,r
Now let us consider the “full” inﬁnitesimal Verschiebung, i.e., the morphism induced on
tangent bundles by Vg,r:
Θ Vg,r
:Θ Sg,r
→ Θ Qg,r
On the one hand, we know what the projection of ΘVg,r
to ΘM
log
g,r
|Qg,r
is. Thus, we would
like to compute the projection of Θ Vg,r
to Θ Qg,r /Mg,r
. We shall soon see that, in fact, we
have already computed this projection as well, in the course of proving Theorem 2.13.
Suppose (as in the previous subsection) we have a log scheme Slog with an r-pointed
stable curve of genus g, flog : Xlog → Slog, and an indigenous bundle ( E, ∇ E)o n Xlog.
Then the ﬁrst relative parabolic de Rham cohomology module R1fDR,∗(Ad(E)) (as in
Chapter I, Theorem 2.8) is naturally isomorphic to the pull-back toSlog (via the classifying
morphism for {Xlog,(E, ∇ E)})o fΘ S
log
g,r
.O n R1fDR,∗(Ad(E)), we have a Hodge ﬁltration
0 → f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D) → R1fDR,∗(Ad(E)) → R1f∗τXlog/Slog → 0
where the surjection in the above exact sequence is exactly the pull-back to Slog of the
projection Θ S
log
g,r
→ Θ M
log
g,r
|Sg,r
.
76

On the other hand, consider the p-curvature of Ad(E): PE : T→ Ad(E). Then by
applying “R1fDR,∗” to the dual of PE,w eg e tam o r p h i s m
R1fDR,∗(Ad(E)) → R1fDR,∗(T ∨)
Now by Poincar´e duality, we have
R1fDR,∗(T ∨) ∼= {R1fDR,∗(T )}∨
Moreover, we computed R1fDR,∗(T ) in Proposition 1.1. In particular, we have a natural
inclusion R1f∗(τXlog/Slog )F ↪→ R1fDR,∗(T ). Thus, if we compose the above morphism
induced by P∨
E with the dual surjection to this natural inclusion, we obtain a natural
morphism
Θ E : R1fDR,∗(Ad(E)) → (f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D))F
Then we have the following result:
Theorem 2.14. Let (E, ∇ E) be indigenous on Xlog. Then the pull-back to Slog of the
projection of Θ Vg,r
to Θ M
log
g,r
is given by the surjection in the Hodge ﬁltration; the pull-
back to Slog of the projection of Θ Vg,r
to Θ Qg,r /Mg,r
is given by Θ E.
Proof. It remains to prove the statement about the projection to ΘQg,r /Mg,r
.T od ot h i s
we consider an inﬁnitesimal deformation of ( E, ∇ E)o v e rSlog[ϵ]/(ϵ2). But the section of
(f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D))F that we obtain can be computed locally on X. Moreover, locally on
X, this calculation is exactly the same as that of Theorem 2.13. This proves the result.⃝
Corollary 2.15. Let (E, ∇ E) be indigenous on Xlog.I f Θ E is surjective, then (E, ∇ E) is
admissible. In particular, if the morphism V
log
g,r : S
log
g,r
→ Q
log
g,r
is log ´etale at the image of
the classifying morphism Slog → S
log
g,r for (E, ∇ E),t h e n(E, ∇ E) is admissible.
Proof. Since being admissible is an open condition, it suﬃces to prove the result when S
is the spectrum of an algebraically closed ﬁeld. If V
log
g,r is log ´etale, then by Theorem 2.14,
Θ E must be surjective. Thus, it suﬃces to prove the ﬁrst statement. Suppose that ( E, ∇ E)
is not admissible. Thus, the morphism P∨
E :A d (E) →T ∨ has a nonempty zero locus.
One can compute the p-curvature explicitly at a marked point (where the monodromy is
nonzero and nilpotent); it follows that the zero locus does not contain any marked points.
Now there are two possibilities: the zero locus either avoids the nodes or it does not.
Let us ﬁrst do the case where the zero locus of P
∨
E avoids the nodes. Since P∨
E is
horizontal, its zero locus must be the pull-back of some closed subscheme via ΦX/S.T h u s ,
77

in particular, there exists some point x ∈ X (which is neither a marked point nor a
node) such that P∨
E is zero at Φ−1
X/S(xF ) (the scheme-theoretic ﬁber). By the deﬁnition of
Θ E, it follows that the image of Θ E lands in the subspace Vx of H0(X, (ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D))F
consisting of sections that vanish at xF . Now by Riemann-Roch on curves, Vx cannot be
all of H0(X, (ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D))F , unless g = 0 and r =3 ,o r g = 1 and r = 1. This completes
the proof (under the assumption that P∨
E avoids the nodes), except for these two special
cases. For g =0 , r = 3, we shall show in the subsection of §3 on totally degenerate curves
that the unique indigenous bundle on such a curve is necessarily admissible. (One checks
easily that there are no vicious circles in the reasoning.) For g =1 , r = 1, we note that
P(E, ∇
E) is necessarily invariant with respect to the automorphismα given by multiplying
by −1. Thus, if we pull-back by the morphism X → X given by multiplying by 2, it is
still invariant under α. Hence it descends to the four-pointed curve of genus zero Y log of
which Xlog is a log ´etale double covering. Let us call this descended bundle P(F, ∇ F ).
Thus, P(F, ∇ F ) is indigenous on Y log. It is easy to see that Θ E and Θ F are the same
morphism; thus, the hypothesis holds for P(F, ∇ F ), as well. Thus, we reduce to the case
g =0 , r = 4, which has already been checked.
Now let us consider the case where P∨
E vanishes at a node ν ∈ X.L e t πlog : Zlog →
Xlog be the partial normalization of Xlog at ν (where the log structure on Zlog is such
that the points mapping to ν are marked points). Let ( F, ∇ F )
def
= π∗(E, ∇ E). Now let us
consider the commutative diagram:
H1(X,τXlog/Slog )F −→ H1
DR(Xlog,Ad(E)) −→ H1(X,τXlog/Slog )
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
H
1(Z,τZlog/Slog )F −→ H1
DR(Zlog,Ad(F))′ −→ H1(Z,τZlog/Slog )
where the vertical arrows are pull-backs viaπ; the horizontal arrows on the left are induced
by PE; and the horizontal arrows on the right are induced by the Hodge ﬁltration. Finally,
the “prime” on the de Rham cohomology on the bottom row indicates that the we are
taking non-parabolic de Rham cohomology on Z
log (since (F, ∇ F )m a yn o te v e nh a v ea
natural parabolic structure, if (E, ∇ E) is not of restrictable type). Let η be a generator of
the kernel of H1(X,τXlog/Slog ) → H1(Z,τZlog/Slog ). Let us consider what happens to ηF
as we move it around the above commutative diagram. SincePE is zero at ν,i fw em o v ei t
along the top toH1(X,τXlog/Slog ), we get zero. Thus, its image inH1
DR(Xlog,Ad(E)) lies in
H0(X, (ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D)). But the pull-back map H1
DR(Xlog,Ad(E)) → H1
DR(Zlog,Ad(F))′
maps H0(X, (ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D)) injectively into H0(Z, (ωlog
Z/S)⊗2). Going around the other
way, however, (i.e., going down and then to the right), we see that the image of ηF in
H1
DR(Zlog,Ad(F))′ is zero. We thus conclude that the image of ηF in H1
DR(Xlog,Ad(E))
is zero. But this contradicts the surjectivity of Θ E, since the upper horizontal morphism
on the left-hand side of the above diagram is dual to ΘE. This completes the proof. ⃝
78

Conversely, let us suppose that ( E, ∇ E) is nilpotent and admissible. Then we claim
that Θ E is necessarily surjective. Indeed, for simplicity, it suﬃces to prove this when S
is the spectrum of a ﬁeld. Let K be the kernel of P∨
E :A d (E) →T ∨. Note that the
connection on Ad(E) restricts to a connection ∇ K on K.T h u s ,(K, ∇ K) is an FL-bundle.
Also, we have a horizontal exact sequence:
0 →T →K→O X → 0
in which the connecting morphism OS → R1fDR,∗(T ) must be injective (since (K, ∇ K)i s
an FL-bundle). Moreover, it is a tautology that the composite of this morphism OS →
R1fDR,∗(T ) with the projectionR1fDR,∗(T ) →O S of Proposition 1.1 is the identity. Thus,
we see that the morphism R1f∗(τXlog/Slog )F ↪→ R1fDR,∗(T ) → R1fDR,∗(K) is injective.
Now let C =A d (E)/T . We have a connection ∇ C on C, induced by the connection on
Ad(E). Thus, we get a horizontal exact sequence:
0 →O X →C→T ∨ → 0
in which the connecting morphism ( f∗ωlog
X/S)F → R1fDR,∗(OX) must be injective (since
otherwise, C would admit two horizontal, generically linearly indendent sections, which
contradicts the fact that the p-curvature is nonzero). Lastly, we consider the horizontal
exact sequence:
0 →K→ Ad(E) →T ∨ → 0
in which the composite of the connecting morphism ( f∗ωlog
X/S)F → R1fDR,∗(K)w i t ht h e
projection R1fDR,∗(K) → R1fDR,∗(OX)i s injective, as we observed above. Since the
image of R1f∗(τXlog/Slog )F ⊆ R1fDR,∗(K) under the map R1fDR,∗(K) → R1fDR,∗(OX)
is zero, it thus follows that if we compose the inclusion R1f∗(τXlog/Slog )F ⊆ R1fDR,∗(K)
with the morphism R1fDR,∗(K) → R1fDR,∗(Ad(E)), the resulting morphism
R1f∗(τXlog/Slog )F → R1fDR,∗(Ad(E))
is injective. But this morphism is dual to Θ E.T h u s ,ΘE is surjective. This completes the
proof of the claim.
Let N
log
g,r be the log stack obtained by pulling back the log structure onM
log
g,r
to Ng,r.
Since Ng,r is the zero locus of the Verschiebung, it follows that N
log
g,r is log smooth over
Fp at a point if and only if Θ E is surjective. In other words:
Corollary 2.16. Suppose that (E, ∇ E) is nilpotent indigenous. Then it is admissible if
and only if Ng,r is smooth over Fp at the image of classifying morphism Slog → N
log
g,r for
(E, ∇ E).
79

§3. Hyperbolically Ordinary Curves
Often, in the literature, one speaks of a curve as being “ordinary” if its Jacobian is
ordinary. In fact, however, since the Jacobian only represents the “abelian part” of the
curve, it is in some sense more intrinsic to speak of a curve as ordinary if it ishyperbolically
ordinary in the sense deﬁned below. Philosophically, this means that the Verschiebung on
indigenous bundles is a local isomorphism in a neighborhood of an indigenous bundle that
provides a “nice” uniformization for the curve. Thus, relative to the analogy (explained in
the Introduction) between the Verschiebung on indigenous bundles and the Beltrami equa-
tion, to be hyperbolically ordinary means that the Verschiebung acts (at least locally) as
one might expect from this analogy, given the classical results on existence and uniqueness
of solutions to the Beltrami equation.
Basic Deﬁnitions
Let S
log be a ﬁne noetherian log scheme over Fp.L e t flog : Xlog → Slog be an
r-pointed stable curve of genus g (so 2g − 2+ r ≥ 1). Let D ⊆ X be the divisor of
marked points. Let ( E, ∇ E)b ea n indigenous bundle on Xlog.L e t PE : T→ Ad(E)b ei t s
p-curvature. Recall the Frobenius onR1f∗τXlog/Slog induced by (E, ∇ E):
Φτ
E :( R1f∗τXlog/Slog )F → R1f∗τXlog/Slog
that we deﬁned in §2.
Deﬁnition 3.1. We shall call (E, ∇ E) ordinary if Φτ
E is an isomorphism.
Note that the condition of being ordinary is an open condition on Sg,r. We shall denote
this open set by S
ord
g,r .
Proposition 3.2. If (E, ∇ E) is ordinary, then it is admissible.
Proof. This follows a fortiori from Corollary 2.15. ⃝
The following deﬁnition is key to the entire paper:
Deﬁnition 3.3. We shall say that flog : Xlog → Slog is a hyperbolically ordinary curve if
there exists an ´etale surjection T → S and a nilpotent, ordinary indigenous bundle (E, ∇ E)
on Xlog ×S T.
80

When the context is clear, we shall simply say thatflog is an “ordinary curve.” The reason
for the descriptive “hyperbolically” is that in the literature, the term “ordinary curve” is
frequently used to mean that its Jacobian is ordinary. In this paper, when f
log has an
ordinary Jacobian, we shall say that flog is parabolically ordinary.
Proposition 3.4. If the ﬁber of flog : Xlog → Slog over s ∈ S is hyperbolically ordinary,
then there exists an open setU ⊆ S with s ∈ U such that flog|U is hyperbolically ordinary.
In particular, flog : Xlog → Slog is hyperbolically ordinary if and only if all its ﬁbers are
hyperbolically ordinary.
Proof. Indeed, it suﬃces to consider the universal example. Recall thatNg,r ⊆ Sg,r is the
locus of nilpotent indigenous bundles. Write π : Ng,r → Mg,r for the natural projection.
Let n ∈ Ng,r;l e tm ∈ Mg,r be the point π(n). Then it follows from Theorem 2.13, plus
the deﬁnition of Ng,r as the zero locus of Vg,r that if n is ordinary,t h e nπ must be ´etale
at n.T h u s ,π is open at n. This completes the proof. ⃝
We shall denote the open subscheme of Mg,r (respectively, Ng,r) consisting of hyper-
bolically ordinary curves (respectively, nilpotent, ordinary indigenous bundles) by M
ord
g,r
(respectively, N
ord
g,r
) .T h u s ,w eh a v ean a t u r a l´etale surjection
π : N
ord
g,r → M
ord
g,r
Finally, let us note that over S
ord
g,r ,w eh a v ea n´etale local system in Fp-vector spaces
of dimension 3g − 3+ r obtained by taking the sections of Θ M
log
g,r
|S
ord
g,r
that are invariant
under the Frobenius action on ΘM
log
g,r
|S
ord
g,r
given by −Φτ
E. (Note the minus sign in front of
−Φτ
E! It will be important later in Chapter III.) Let us denote this local system by Θ et
g,r,
and call it the tangential local system on S
ord
g,r . Similarly, by taking its dual Ωet
g,r we obtain
a local system on S
ord
g,r which we shall call the diﬀerential local system onS
ord
g,r .O f t e n ,w e
shall be interested in the restrictions of these local systems to Ng,r.
The Totally Degenerate Case
In this subsection, we show that totally degenerate curves are hyperbolically ordinary.
By Proposition 3.4, this will show that M
ord
g,r is an open dense subscheme of Mg,r.S i n c e
totally degenerate curves have no moduli, there is no loss of generality in assuming that
S =S p e c (F
p). We begin by considering the case g =0 , r = 3. Recall the morphisms
constructed at the end of Chapter I, §3:
Nlog : M
log
1,1[2] → M1,1
81

(parametrizing elliptic curves with level structures on the two-torsion points) and
Λlog : M
log
1,1[2] → M
log
0,4
which takes an elliptic curve to the four-pointed curve of genus zero of which it is a
double covering. Then in this case, we have M
log
0,4 = Xlog. Let us construct a nilpotent,
admissible indigenous bundle on M
log
0,4.S i n c eXlog has only one indigenous P1-bundle
(up to isomorphism), this will complete the proof of Corollary 2.15. To do this, we note
that (as we saw in Example 3 of Chapter I, §2), the ﬁrst de Rham cohomology module of
the universal elliptic curve over
M
log
1,1[2] deﬁnes an indigenous vector bundle ( E, ∇ E). Let
(P → X, ∇P ) be the associated P1-bundle. Now since the map “multiplication by −1” on
an elliptic curve induces the map “multiplication by −1” on E, it follows that (E, ∇ E) will
not descend via Λ. However, since “multiplication by −1” induces the identity onP → X,
we see that ( P → X, ∇P ) does descend via Λ. This gives us an indigenous bundle on
Xlog. To see that it is nilpotent and admissible, it suﬃces to see that ( E, ∇ E) is nilpotent
and admissible. But by (a rather trivial special case of) [Falt], Theorem 6.2, as a de
Rham cohomology module, (E, ∇
E) necessarily forms an MF∇ -object (see Deﬁnition 2.9).
Thus, Proposition 2.10 tells us that (E, ∇ E) is nilpotent and admissible. In particular, this
completes the proof of Corollary 2.15.
Now let us assume that flog : Xlog → Slog is formed by gluing together a number of
copies of the 3-pointed stable curve of genus zero (as in the last subsection of Chapter I,
§2). Then, as we saw in this ﬁnal subsection of Chapter I, §2, we can glue together the
nilpotent, admissible indigenous bundles that we constructed in the previous paragraph
to obtain a nilpotent, admissible indigenous bundle (P → X, ∇
P )o n Xlog. On the other
hand, by Proposition 2.8, every nilpotent, admissible indigenous bundle on Xlog is of
restrictable type. Since there is (up to isomorphism) only one indigenous P1-bundle of
restrictable type on Xlog, it thus follows that:
Proposition 3.5. Up to isomorphism, a totally degenerater-pointed stable curve of genus
g admits one and only one nilpotent, admissible indigenous P1-bundle.
Next, let us consider the cohomology groupH1(X,τXlog/Slog ) of our totally degenerate
curve. If Xlog is obtained by gluing together various copies Xlog
i of the 3-pointed stable
curve of genus zero, let Y log be the disjoint union of the Xlog
i ,a n dl e tνlog : Y log → Xlog
be the natural map. Let 0 → τXlog/Slog → ν∗τY log/Slog →C→ 0 be the natural exact
sequence (where C is deﬁned so as to make the sequence exact). By considering the long
exact cohomology sequence associated to this exact sequence of sheaves, we see that we
obtain a natural isomorphism H1(X,τXlog/Slog ) ∼= H0(X, C). On the other hand, C is
naturally isomorphic to the direct sum of the ( τXlog/Slog )|z,w h e r ez ranges over all the
nodes in X. Moreover, the residue map gives a natural isomorphism τXlog/Slog |z ∼= OS
(well-deﬁned up to sign). Let Σ be the set of nodes of X.T h e n
82

C =
⨁
z∈Σ
(OS)z
where the subscript “ z” is just used as a marker, to indicate which copy of OS one is
referring to. Thus, we have a natural isomorphism (well-deﬁned up to sign on each factor):
H1(X,τXlog/Slog ) ∼=
⨁
z∈Σ
(Fp)z
In particular, since Fp has a natural bilinear form (given by ring multiplicationFp ×Fp →
Fp), using this bilinear form on each factor (Fp)z gives a natural bilinear form:
B : H1(X,τXlog/Slog ) × H1(X,τXlog/Slog ) → Fp
which is now independent of all arbitrary choices of sign.
Proposition 3.6. For every totally degenerate r-pointed curve of genus g,t h e r ei sa
natural nondegenerate bilinear formB on the OS-module R1f∗τXlog/Slog which takes values
in OS.
Next we would like to show that the unique nilpotent, admissible indigenous bundle
(P → X, ∇P )o n Xlog is ordinary. To do this, we must compute the induced Frobenius
action on H1(X,τXlog/Slog ). By using an isomorphism as above
H1(X,τXlog/Slog ) ∼=
⨁
z∈Σ
(Fp)z
we see that it suﬃces to compute the induced Frobenius action on the various ( Fp)z’s.
Consider P |z. The Hodge section σ : X → P deﬁnes a point σz ∈ P |z(Fp). On the other
hand, there is a unique point ﬁxed by the monodromy action qz ∈ P |z(Fp). If we think of
P as P(J /J[3]) (as in Chapter I, Proposition 2.5), then ( J /J[3])z = Vσ ⊕ Vq,w h e r eVσ
(respectively, Vq) is the subspace deﬁned by σz (respectively, qz). Note that by the residue
map, we have natural isomorphisms Vσ ∼= Fp and Vq ∼= Fp. Thus, we obtain a basis
{(1,0); (0,1)} of (J /J[3])z.L e tEσ and Eq be the nilpotent endomorphisms of (J /J[3])z
given, respectively, by the matrices
( 01
00
)
and
( 00
10
)
Thus, Eq is essentially thep-curvature of (π : P → X, ∇P ) restricted toz. Sorting through
all the deﬁnitions, it thus follows that the induced Frobenius action on ( Fp)z is given by
multiplication by tr(Eσ · Eq) = 1. We thus obtain the following result:
83

Proposition 3.7. On a totally degenerater-pointed stable curveXlog of genus g over Fp,
the Frobenius action Φτ
P on H1(X,τXlog/Slog ) induced by the unique nilpotent, admissible
indigenous bundle on Xlog is the identity. In particular, this unique nilpotent, admissible
indigenous bundle is ordinary, and so is Xlog.
Corollary 3.8. The open subschemes M
ord
g,r ⊆ Mg,r and N
ord
g,r
⊆ Ng,r are nonempty.
The Case of Elliptic Curves: The Parabolic Picture
One can get a better feel for ordinariness for general r-pointed stable curves of genus
g by ﬁrst studying ordinariness for elliptic curves. In the case of elliptic curves, there are,
in fact, two possible theories of ordinary bundles and curves: the parabolic theory and
the hyperbolic theory. Indeed, let f
log : Xlog → Slog be a 1-pointed stable curve of genus
1, with marked point ϵ : S → X.L e t Y log be the log scheme obtained from Xlog (as
in the subsection “The Inﬁnitesimal Verschiebung” of §2) by removing the marked point.
Then the parabolic theory (respectively, hyperbolic theory) is obtained by considering the
various properties of the p-curvature of indigenous bundles on Y log (respectively, Xlog).
So far in this Chapter, of course, we have only been considering the hyperbolic theory.
However, since the notion of an indigenous bundle is deﬁned for Y
log, one can consider
its p-curvature, and deﬁne the notions of a nilpotent indigenous bundle, or an admissible
indigenous bundle, just as before. Also, many of the results (though not all) such as
Theorem 2.3 (where we replace the “3 g − 3+ r” by 1) continue to hold in the parabolic
context. The purpose of this subsection is to summarize what happens when one studies
elliptic curves from the parabolic point of view, and to show, in particular, that the notion
of ordinariness that we have deﬁned in this paper (in terms of thep-curvature of indigenous
bundles) reduces to the classical notion of ordinariness of elliptic curves.
First, we introduce some notation. Let
M
log
1,0 = M
log
1,1. (The point here is that we
shall use the notation M
log
1,0 when we are thinking about elliptic curves from the parabolic
point of view.) Let f : G→ M1,0 be the universal elliptic curve, with identity section
ϵ : M1,0 →G .L e t L = f∗ωG/M1,0
be the Hodge bundle. Let Glog be the log stack whose
underlying stack is G and whose log structure is the pull-back of the log structure onM
log
1,0.
Let S1,0 → M1,0 be the torsor overL⊗2 of Schwarz structures onGlog. Then just as before,
we can deﬁne a Verschiebung:
V1,0 : S1,0 → Q1,0
Just as before we have a closed subscheme N1,0 ⊆ S1,0 consisting of nilpotent indigenous
bundles, and an open subscheme S
adm
1,0 ⊆ S1,0 consisting of admissible indigenous bundles.
Also, just as before, we deﬁne an indigenous bundle to be ordinary if its inﬁnitesimal Ver-
schiebung is an isomorphism, and we deﬁne an elliptic curve to be (parabolically) ordinary
if it admits a nilpotent, ordinary indigenous bundle.
84

Now recall that in Example 2 of Chapter I,§2, we constructed a canonical indigenous
bundle on Glog. This indigenous bundle thus deﬁnes a global section τS : M1,0 → S1,0
which trivializes the L⊗2-torsor S1,0 → M1,0. Moreover, by [KM], p. 227, one knows that
if p ≥ 5, then H0(M1,0, L⊗2) = 0, so this trivialization is unique. Let us also recall that,
in the deﬁnition of the indigenous bundle ( E, ∇ E) in Example 2 of Chapter I, §2, we had
a subbundle 0 ⊕O G ⊆ ω ⊕O G = E (where ω = ωG/M1,0
) which was stabilized by the
connection ∇ E. Moreover, the induced connection on OG was the trivial connection. Put
another way, E admits a nonzero horizontal section. It thus follows that the p-curvature
of ∇ E is nilpotent.T h u s ,τS : M1,0 → S1,0 lands inside N1,0.
Let θ be a section of L⊗2 over some ´etale V → M1,0.L e t ∇θ
E be the connection
formed by adding to ∇ E the endomorphism given by
E = ω ⊕O G →O G → ω⊗2 ∼= (ω ⊕ 0) ⊗ ω ⊆E⊗ ω
where the ﬁrst morphism is the natural projection; the second morphism is multiplication
by θ; and the ﬁnal inclusion is the natural one. Let δ be a section of L over V which is
everywhere nonzero. Thus, the sectionsδand 1 deﬁne a global trivialization of E = ω⊕O G
over GV . We shall write sections of E|V in terms of this basis, given by δ and 1. Write
θ = φ · δ2,w h e r eφ is a function on V .L e t ∇θ be the morphism E|V →E | V given by
evaluating ∇θ
E on δ−1. Then we see that ∇θ is given by the following matrix:
( 0 φ
10
)
To obtain the p-curvature of ∇θ
E, we must iterate this matrix p times. This yields the
matrix:
φ
1
2 (p−1) ·
( 0 φ
10
)
Now let us write δ−p = h · δ−1 (so h is the classical Hasse invariant). Thus, to compute
the p-curvature of ∇θ
E, we must subtract from the matrix just given the following matrix:
h ·
( 0 φ
10
)
Thus, we obtain that the p-curvature of ∇θ
E is given by:
(φ
1
2 (p−1) − h) ·
( 0 φ
10
)
85

If we then take the determinant, we obtain our Verschiebung (applied to (δF )2):
−φ · (φ
1
2 (p−1) − h)2 = −φp +2 h · φ
1
2 (p+1) − h2 · φ
Let us rewrite this in invariant form. The trivialization τS of S1,0 → M1,0 allows us to
write S1,0 as Spec(⊕i≥0L⊗−2i). On the other hand, Q1,0 is given by Spec(⊕i≥0L⊗−2p·i).
Thus, V1,0 is determined by specifying the morphism of quasi-coherent sheaves:
ΓV : L⊗−2p →
⨁
i≥0
L⊗−2i
Let us denote the component of ΓV that maps into L⊗−2i by Γ[i]
V : L⊗−2p →L ⊗−2i.S i n c e
L is ample, it follows that Γ[i]
V =0w h e ni>p (as we saw already in the proof of Theorem
2.3). Let χ ∈ Γ(M1,0, Lp−1)b et h e Hasse invariant (as in [KM], p. 353). Then we see
that we have proven the following result:
Theorem 3.9. If i = p,t h e nΓ[i]
V is multiplication by −1.I f i = 1
2 (p +1 ),t h e nΓ[i]
V
is multiplication by 2 χ.I f i =1 ,t h e nΓ[i]
V is multiplication by −χ2. For all other i,
Γ[i]
V =0 .
In particular, this completes the proof of Theorem 2.3.
Corollary 3.10. Geometrically,
N1,0 consists of two irreducible components I1 and I2:
One, I1, is the section τS. The other, I2, is nonreduced, and (I2)red may be described as
follows: In [KM], p. 361, one ﬁnds a description of the Igusa curveIg(p), with its canonical
(Z/pZ)×-action. Then (I2)red is the quotient ofIg(p) by the subgroup{±1}⊆ (Z/pZ)×.
In order to see which nilpotent bundles are ordinary, we must compute the derivative
of the Verschiebung map. In terms of the local objects we used in the computation above,
we obtain that “dV/dφ”i sg i v e nb y :
h(φ
1
2 (p−1) − h)
In particular, if h = 0, then the inﬁnitesimal Verschiebung is identically zero, while if
h ̸= 0, then the inﬁnitesimal Verschiebung at τS is nonzero. Moreover, because of the
square factor in the expression for the Verschiebung, we see that if h ̸= 0, then the only
nilpotent indigenous bundle at which the inﬁnitesimal Verschiebung will be nonzero is the
indigenous bundle given by τS. We thus obtain the following:
Theorem 3.11. An elliptic curve is parabolically ordinary if and only if it is ordinary
in the classical sense (i.e., its Hasse invariant is nonzero). If it is ordinary, then the
indigenous bundle constructed in Example 2 of Chapter I, §2, is the unique nilpotent,
ordinary indigenous bundle on the curve.
86

The Case of Elliptic Curves: The Hyperbolic Picture
In this subsection, we consider 1-pointed stable curves of genus 1 ashyperbolic objects.
In particular, we shall highlight the numerous contrasts with the parabolic viewpoint
presented above. We begin by considering the torsor
S1,1 → M1,1. Recall that this
torsor has a canonical trivialization at inﬁnity, deﬁned by the unique nilpotent, admissible
indigenous bundle on the singular 1-pointed stable curve of genus 1 (Proposition 3.5). Let
us suppose that our prime p is ≥ 5. Then it follows from Chapter I, Theorem 3.6, that
S1,1 → M1,1 does not admit a section which passes through the canonical trivialization
at inﬁnity. Now let us consider the closed subscheme N1,1 ⊆ S1,1. By Theorem 2.3, the
natural morphism N1,1 → M1,1 is ﬁnite and ﬂat of degree p. Let us consider the irreducible
component I⊆ N1,1 which passes through the canonical trivialization at inﬁnity. Then
I is generically reduced. Moreover, the degree of I→ M1,1 must be ≥ 2. This behavior
already is substantially diﬀerent from the parabolic case, where the irreducible component
passing through the unique nilpotent, ordinary indigenous bundle at inﬁnity has degree
one over
M1,0. Thus, in particular, N1,1 (respectively, V1,1) is not isomorphic to N1,0
(respectively, V1,0), despite the fact that as stacks,M1,1 ∼= M1,0; S1,1 ∼= S1,0; Q1,1 ∼= Q1,0.
Since N1,1 → M1,1 has degree p, it follows that there exist points ofN1,1 over the inﬁnity
point of M1,1 at which N1,1 → M1,1 is not ´etale. Such points correspond to nilpotent
indigenous bundles which are not admissible (by Proposition 3.5). This fulﬁlls our earlier
pledge to show the existence of such bundles. Of these various observations, we record the
following for later reference:
Proposition 3.12. If p ≥ 5, then the irreducible component of N1,1 passing through the
canonical trivialization at inﬁnity is generically reduced and has degree≥ 2 over M1,1.
The Generic Uniformization Number
We return to the case of an r-pointed stable curve of genus g,w h e r er and g are
arbitrary (but satisfy 2g − 2+ r ≥ 1). Suppose we are given the combinatorial data Δ (as
at the end of Chapter I, Secion 2: consisting of a graph Γ, plus λi’s, etc.) for a totally
degenerate curve. We shall call two collections of such data Δ and Δ ′ equivalent if they
deﬁne isomorphic totally degenerate curves. Let us denote by Dg,r the equivalence classes
of such data Δ. Alternatively, one may think of Dg,r as the set of isomorphism classes of
totally degenerate r-pointed stable curves of genus g. Now let us consider the morphism:
Ng,r → Mg,r
We know that it is ﬁnite, ﬂat, and of degree p3g−3+r.I fΔ ∈D g,r, consider the irreducible
component IΔ of Ng,r that passes through the unique nilpotent, admissible indigenous
bundle (as in Proposition 3.5) on the curve corresponding to Δ. Then IΔ is generically
reduced. Let GΔ be the degree of IΔ over Mg,r. We shall refer to GΔ as the generic
87

uniformization number for the dataΔ. (The reason for attaching the term “uniformization”
to this number will become apparent in later Chapters.) Let
Gg,r =
∑
Δ ∈Dg,r
GΔ
Now let us suppose thatp is suﬃciently large so that the class Σ (Chapter I, Theorem 3.4)
in H1(Mg,r,ΩM
log
g,r
)i s nonzero. Then we have the following rough result:
Proposition 3.13. For g ≥ 3 and p suﬃciently large, the number GΔ is between 2 and
p3g−3+r.
Proof. The upper bound follows from the fact thatNg,r → Mg,r has degree p3g−3+r.O n
the other hand, since Ng,r → Mg,r is ﬁnite ,a n dMg,r is normal, it follows that if IΔ had
degree 1 over Mg,r, it would, in fact, be isomorphic toMg,r, hence deﬁne a section of Sg,r
over Mg,r. By Chapter I, Theorem 3.4, we know that this is impossible, for p suﬃciently
large. ⃝
It is not clear to the author how far these bounds are from being sharp. For instance,
it could be the case that Ng,r is, in fact, irreducible. To compute the number GΔ exactly
would involve understanding the monodromy around curves that are not hyperbolically
ordinary. That is to say, it would involve proving a sort of hyperbolic analogue of Igusa’s
theorem on the monodromy around supersingular elliptic curves in the parabolic case.
It is interesting to know, however, that G
Δ ̸= 1 because this constitutes a depar-
ture from the behavior of complex indigenous bundles. To see this, we must ﬁrst explain
certain aspects of the analogy between the complex case and the characteristic p case
treated here. First of all, the condition of being nilpotent (and ordinary) is analogous, in
the complex case, to having real monodromy. Indeed, to be nilpotent (and admissible)
is (by Proposition 2.10) the same as coming from an MF
∇ -object in the sense of [Falt].
But to be an MF∇ -object means, essentially, that the bundle with connection admits a
Frobenius action, i.e., that the monodromy is Frobenius-invariant. Since the Frobenius
at the inﬁnite prime is complex conjugation, it is thus natural to regard nilpotent (and
admissible) bundles as the characteristic p analogue of complex indigenous bundles with
real monodromy. On the other hand, in the complex case, within the real-analytic space
of complex indigenous bundles with real monodromy, there is a canonical, topologically
isolated component, corresponding to the indigenous bundle arising from the uniformiza-
tion by the upper half-plane. On the other hand, in the characteristic p case treated here,
the fact that I
Δ has degree ≥ 2o v e rMg,r means that there is no canonical choice of a
nilpotent, ordinary indigenous bundle, even on a generic curve: since the monodromy at
the curves which are not hyperbolically ordinary is nontrivial, one such indigenous bundle
is always carried around to another.
88

Chapter III: Canonical Modular Frobenius Liftings
§0. Introduction
The present Chapter is central to the entire paper. In it, we construct a canonical
Frobenius lifting on (N
ord
g,r )log,a n da canonical indigenous bundle on the universal curve
over ( N
ord
g,r )log. This pair of a canonical Frobenius lifting and a canonical indigenous
bundle are uniquely characterized by the fact that, relative to this Frobenius lifting, the
renormalized Frobenius pull-back (Deﬁnition 1.4) of the canonical indigenous bundle is
equal to itself. In some sense, an ordinary (in the sense of Deﬁnition 1.1) Frobenius lifting
is like a p-adic analogue of a K¨ahler metric on a complex manifold in that it gives rise
to local canonical coordinates. Since there are a number of general properties of ordinary
Frobenius liftings that we will need throughout the rest of the paper, we give a basic
exposition of the properties of such Frobenius liftings in the ﬁrst Section of this Chapter.
The main result is that such a Frobenius lifting deﬁnes canonical aﬃne and multiplicative
coordinates. Thus, in particular, our canonical Frobenius lifting on (
N
ord
g,r )log deﬁnes such
canonical coordinates on N
ord
g,r .S i n c eN
ord
g,r
is ´etale over Mg,r, if one thinks of a point
of N
ord
g,r as a point of Mg,r, together with a choice (from a ﬁnite number of possibilities)
of some added structure – which we call a p-adic quasiconformal equivalence class –t h e n
we obtain the result that for every choice of a p-adic quasiconformal equivalence class, we
obtain a canonical local uniformization ofMg,r. The reason for the name “quasiconformal
equivalence class,” is that once one chooses this piece of data for a curve, we shall see
in this Chapter and in following Chapters that the uniformization theory of the curve is
entirely determined. This is reminiscent of Bers’ approach (as in [Bers]) to proving that
hyperbolic curves can be uniformized by the upper half plane: Namely, he proves that (in
the complex case) all hyperbolic curves with the same genus and number of marked points
belong to the same quasiconformal equivalence class. Thus, once we choose this class in
the p-adic case, we obtain a “covariant” uniformization by the aﬃne space modeled on
the tangent space to M
g,r at the curve in question. To obtain uniformizations by the
quadratic diﬀerentials (as in the complex case), we need more information than just the
quasiconformal equivalence class. Namely, we need a topological marking of the curve.
Once we deﬁne this, we obtain uniformizations by the quadratic diﬀerentials.
The canonical Frobenius gives rise to another natural notion, for which I know no
parallel in the complex case: a canonical lifting of a curve over a perfect ﬁeld to the ring of
Witt vectors with coeﬃcients in that ﬁeld. This is reminiscent of the canonical lifting of an
elliptic curve in Serre-Tate theory. In fact, this analogy is more than philosophical: Just
as in Chapter II, by using indigenous bundles on elliptic curves – regarded parabolically –
one can obtain a similar uniformization theory, involving a canonical Frobenius lifting (on
the moduli stack of ordinary elliptic curves) and a canonical indigenous bundle. We then
compute that these canonical objects for elliptic curves are precisely the canonical objects
89

that one obtains from classical Serre-Tate theory. Thus, one may regard the theory of
uniformizations and canonical liftings discussed in this Chapter as the natural hyperbolic
analogue of Serre-Tate theory.
§1. Generalities on Ordinary Frobenius Liftings
Let k be a perfect ﬁeld of odd characteristic p.L e t A = W(k), the ring of Witt
vectors with coeﬃcients in k.L e tS be a formally smooth, geometrically connected p-adic
formal scheme over A of constant relative dimension d.L e t S
log be a log formal scheme
whose underlying formal scheme isS and whose log structure is given by a relative divisor
with normal crossings D ⊆ S over A.L e tΦ A : A → A be the Frobenius morphism on A.
Let us denote the result of base changing by Φ A by means of a superscripted “ F.” Let
Φlog : Slog → Slog be a Frobenius lifting, i.e., a morphism whose reduction modulo p is the
usual Frobenius morphism in characteristic p. In this Section, we shall study the case of
a certain kind of Frobenius lifting, called an ordinary Frobenius lifting. It turns out that
such Frobenius liftings deﬁne various types of canonical parameters. It is these canonical
parameters that will constitute the various “uniformizations” that we obtain in this paper.
Basic Deﬁnitions
Let us consider the morphism
dΦlog :Φ ∗Ωlog
S/A → Ωlog
S/A
induced by Φlog on logarithmic diﬀerentials. It is always divisible by p.
Deﬁnition 1.1. We shall call Φlog : Slog → Slog an ordinary Frobenius liftingif 1
p ·dΦlog :
Φ∗Ωlog
S/A → Ωlog
S/A is an isomorphism.
We shall use the notation
ΩΦ :Φ ∗Ωlog
S/A → Ωlog
S/A
to denote the isomorphism 1
p · dΦlog. Note that by considering the sections of Ωlog
S/A which
are invariant under ΩΦ,w eo b t a i na n´etale sheaf Ωet
Φ in free Zp-modules of rank d on S.
Deﬁnition 1.2. We shall call Ωet
Φ the canonical diﬀerential local system onS associated
to Φlog. We shall call its dual Θet
Φ the canonical tangential local system onS associated to
Φlog.
90

Moreover, by taking the sections of Ωet
Φ to be horizontal, we obtain a natural connection
∇Ω on Ωlog
S/A which is associated to Φlog. Note that since Ωet
Φ is an ´etale (not just log ´etale)
local system on S, the connection ∇Ω is a connection on S with respect to the trivial log
structure, i.e., it has no logarithmic poles at D.
The Uniformizing Galois Representation
Now we would like to associate to Φlog a canonical “uniformizing MF∇ -object” (where
we use the category MF∇ in the sense of [Falt], §2) as follows. Let
P =Ω log
S/A ⊕O S
We regard P as being ﬁltered by taking the ﬁltration
F2(P)
def
=0 ; F1(P)
def
=Ω log
S/A ⊕ 0 ⊆P ; F0(P)
def
= P
Let ∇ P be the logarithmic connection onP obtained as follows: We start with the connec-
tion ∇ ′
P on P which is the direct sum of the trivial connection on OS and the connection
∇Ω on Ωlog
S/A. Then we add to ∇ ′
P the End(P)-valued logarithmic diﬀerential given by
P→ Ωlog
S/A
∼= (0 ⊕O S) ⊗OS Ωlog
S/A ⊆P⊗ OS Ωlog
S/A
where the ﬁrst morphism is the projection on the ﬁrst direct summand. The resulting
logarithmic connection on P will be called ∇ P. Note that the Kodaira-Spencer morphism
for F1(P) ⊆P with respect to ∇ P is the identity map. Next, we deﬁne the Frobenius
action on P as follows: We take the Frobenius action to be the morphism PΦ :Φ ∗P→P
which is diagonal with respect to the direct sum decomposition P =Ω log
S/A ⊕O S and is
equal to Φ−1 on OS and to dΦlog on Ωlog
S/A. One sees easily that this Frobenius action PΦ
is horizontal with respect to ∇ P. Note that this implies that ∇ P is integrable, since its
curvature would deﬁne a Frobenius-invariant section of (Ωlog
S/A)∨ ⊗OS ∧2 Ωlog
S/A
, but Φlog acts
on this bundle with slope 1, so any Frobenius-invariant section must necessarily vanish.
Thus,
(P,F ·(P), ∇ P, PΦ)
deﬁnes an MF∇ -object in the sense of [Falt], §2.
Deﬁnition 1.3. We shall call this MF∇ -object the uniformizing MF∇ -object on Slog
associated to Φlog.
91

Now choose a base point s : Spf(A) → S that avoids D.L e t ΠSlog = π1(Slog
K ,sK),
where K is the quotient ﬁeld of A, and by the fundamental group of “Slog,” we mean the
fundamental group of the open formal subscheme which is the complement of divisors that
deﬁne the log structure. Then by the theory of [Falt], §2, the uniformizing MF∇ -object
on Slog deﬁnes a dual crystalline Galois representation
Pet
of ΠSlog .
Deﬁnition 1.4. We shall call this Galois representation the uniformizing Galois repre-
sentation on Slog associated to Φlog.
Note that OS ∼= (0 ⊕O S) ⊆P is stabilized by ∇ P and PΦ, and thus deﬁnes an MF∇ -
subobject of the uniformizing object which is equal to the trivial MF∇ -object. If we take
the quotient of the uniformizing MF∇ -object by this subobject, we obtain the MF∇ -
object corresponding to the ´etale Galois representation Θet
Φ , Tate twisted once. Thus, we
have an exact sequence of ΠSlog -modules
0 → Θet
Φ (1) →P et → Zp → 0
which thus deﬁnes an extension class:
ηΦ ∈ H1(ΠSlog ,Θet
Φ (1))
We remark relative to the analogy between Frobenius liftings and K¨ahler metrics, that the
class ηΦ formally “looks” somewhat like the diﬀerential form that deﬁnes a K¨ahler metric.
Also, we can deﬁne a ring with Galois action which will be useful later. First consider
the symmetric algebra on Ωet
Φ (−1) over Zp:
S·
Zp Ωet
Φ
(−1)
Let us consider the Galois action of Π Slog on this symmetric algebra which diﬀers from
the direct sum of the actions on the Si (Ωet
Φ (−1)) by the class ηΦ. Thus, in other words,
Spec of the symmetric algebra with this Galois action parametrizes sections of the exact
sequence
0 → Θet
Φ (1) →P et → Zp → 0
If we then adjoin the divided powers of the augmentation ideal to this Zp[ΠSlog ]-algebra,
we obtain a Zp-algebra AΦ.L e t Tlog → Slog be the ﬁnite covering given by Φ log (so
92

Tlog ∼= Slog). Since this ﬁnite covering is log ´etale in characteristic zero, we may form the
subgroup ΠTlog ⊆ ΠSlog corresponding to this covering. Then one sees easily that we have
a natural ΠTlog -action on AΦ, compatible with the ΠSlog -action on the symmetric algebra.
(We need to restrict to ΠTlog so that the Galois action respects the divided powers.)
Deﬁnition 1.5. We shall call ηΦ the canonical Galois extension class associated to Φlog.
We shall call AΦ the ring of additive periods of Φlog.
The Canonical p-divisible Group
Let us look at the uniformizing MF∇ -object
(P,F ·(P), ∇ P, PΦ)
again. Let U ⊆ S be the open formal subscheme which is the complement of the divisor
U. Then by [Falt], Theorem 7.1, this MF∇ -object deﬁnes a p-divisible group GΦ over U.
Moreover, just as with the corresponding Galois representation discussed in the previous
subsection, we have an exact sequence of p-divisible groups over U:
0 → Θ
et
Φ (1) ⊗Zp Qp/Zp → GΦ → Qp/Zp → 0
Deﬁnition 1.6. We shall call GΦ the canonical p-divisible group associated to Φlog.
Now let ω ∈ Ωet
Φ be an element whose reduction modulo p is nonzero. Thus, ω deﬁnes
a Zp-linear morphism
ω(−):Θ et
Φ → Zp
Let Sn → S be the ´etale covering deﬁned by taking the kernel of the morphism Π Slog →
GL(Θet
Φ ⊗ Z/pnZ). Let Un → U be its restriction to U.T h e no v e rUn, ω(−) ⊗ Z/pnZ will
be Galois equivariant, so that, by pushing forward the above exact sequence by means of
ω(−), we obtain an exact sequence of ﬁnite ﬂat group schemes:
0 → Z/p
nZ(1) → Gω,n → Z/pnZ → 0
which, by Kummer theory, deﬁnes an element
uω,n ∈ Γ(Un, O×
Un )/Γ(Un, O×
Un )pn
and thus a diﬀerential
93

ω′
n
def
=( duω,n )/uω,n ∈ Γ(Un,ΩUn/A ⊗ Z/pnZ)
Now let n →∞ .L e t ˜S be the p-adic completion of the inverse limit of the Sn.S i n c et h e
various ω′
n are compatible, we thus obtain a diﬀerential
ω′ ∈ Γ( ˜U, Ω ˜U/A)
Now we would like to claim that ω′ is none other than the original diﬀerential ω that we
started out with. In some sense, I believe that this fact is well-known, but I do not know
of a clear reference for this fact, so I will prove it explicitly here. First, however, we need
to make a few more general observations concerning G
Φ. The proof will be given in the
subsection after the next.
Logarithms of Periods
Suppose that k is algebraically closed, and let z : Spf(A) → S be a rational point
whose reduction modulo p is equal to the base point s. In particular, it follows that z
maps into U, and factors canonically through ˜U (since it coincides with the base point s
modulo p). Thus, we can restrict the Gω,n to Spec(A) via z so as to obtain an extension
0 → Qp/Zp(1) → Gω,z → Qp/Zp → 0
of p-divisible groups over Spec(A). By Kummer theory, this extension deﬁnes a unit
uω,z ∈ A×
whose image in the residue ﬁeld k is 1.
On the other hand, we can consider the Dieudonn´ ec r y s t a lEω of Gω,z .T h u s ,Eω
is a free A-module of rank two with a ﬁltration F1(Eω) ⊆ Eω, and a Frobenius action
ΦE : EF
ω → Eω. This Frobenius action has a unique subspace EF ⊆ Eω (respectively,
EV ⊆ Eω) on which Frobenius acts with slope zero (respectively, one). Also, EV and
F1(Eω) deﬁne the same subspace modulo p.S i n c eF1(Eω)a n dE/F 1(Eω) are naturally
isomorphic to A, in the future, we shall identify them with A. Thus, by projection EF ↪→
Eω → Eω/F1(Eω)= A, we obtain a natural isomorphism of EF with A, and, dually,
a natural isomorphism of EV with A. Finally, since Eω = EF ⊕ EV , we may regard
F1(Eω) ⊆ Eω as the graph of anA-linear morphism A = EV → A = EF , which, by means
of the various canonical trivializations, gives us an element Lω,z ∈ p · A.
Theorem 1.7. We have Lω,z = log(uω,z ).
94

Proof. Let us denote the sequence of Galois modules which are the p-adic Tate modules
of the above exact sequence ofp-divisible groups by 0 → W0 → W → W1 → 0. Recall the
exponential map of [BK], p. 359, Deﬁnition 3.10,
exp : F1(Eω)⊗−2 ∼= A → A× = H1
Gal(Zp(1))
where the ﬁrst isomorphism is the trivialization referred to above, andH1
Gal denotes Galois
cohomology with respect to Gal(K/K), whereK is the quotient ﬁeld ofK. By [BK], p. 359,
Example 3.10.1, one knows that this exponential map is equal to the ordinary exponential
map deﬁned by the exponential series. Let η
2 = log(uω,z ); η1 =e x p (η2).
Now we diagram-chase. Let us denote by P the (inﬁnite dimensional) Galois module
Bcrys
f=1 ⊕ BDR
+ (notation of [BK]). Applying the exact sequence (1.17.1) of [BK] to the
exact sequence of Galois modules 0 → W0 → W → W1 → 0, we obtain the following
commutative diagram:
H0
Gal(W0) −→ H0
Gal(W) −→ H0
Gal(W1) −→ H1
Gal(W0)
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
H
0
Gal(W0 ⊗ P) −→ H0
Gal(W ⊗ P) −→ H0
Gal(W1 ⊗ P) −→ H1
Gal(W0 ⊗ P)
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
H0
Gal(W0 ⊗ BDR) −→ H0
Gal(W ⊗ BDR) −→ H0
Gal(W1 ⊗ BDR) −→ H1
Gal(W0 ⊗ BDR)
N o ww eh a v ea ne l e m e n t1∈ H0
Gal(W1) which maps via the connecting homomorphism to
η1 ∈ H1
Gal(W0); since the image ofη1 in H1
Gal(W0 ⊗P) is zero, we can consider log(η1)= η2.
On the other hand, 1 ∈ H0
Gal(W1)m a p st oa ne l e m e n tη3 ∈ H0
Gal(W1 ⊗ P)t h a td i e sw h e n
hit with the connecting homomorphism toH1
Gal(W0 ⊗P). Thus we see thatη3 comes from
an element η4 ∈ H0
Gal(W ⊗ P) which is unique modulo H0
Gal(W0 ⊗ P). Mapping η4 down
one step to H0
Gal(W ⊗ BDR), we get η5 ∈ H0
Gal(W ⊗ BDR)t h a td i e si nH0
Gal(W1 ⊗ BDR),
hence comes from a unique η6 ∈ H0
Gal(W0 ⊗ BDR)/H0
Gal(W0 ⊗ P)= TV . Now it follows
from the explicit deﬁnitions of the maps in the sequence (1.17.1) of [BK] thatη6 is precisely
Lω,z . On the other hand, it follows from general principles of homological algebra that
η6 = η2. This completes the proof. ⃝
Compatibility of Diﬀerentials
Now we return to the issue of showing thatω′ = ω. Let us begin by observing that ω
can also be deﬁned as follows. By taking the direct limit of the Gω,n’s restricted to ˜U,w e
obtain an extension of p-divisible groups
0 → Qp/Zp(1) → Gω → Qp/Zp → 0
95

over ˜U. This, moreover, deﬁnes a Dieudonn´e crystal (E, ∇ E) with a ﬁltration F1(E) ⊆E ,
and Frobenius action. In fact, ( E, ∇ E) is obtained from ( P, ∇ P) simply by pulling back
0 →O S →P→ ΩS/A → 0 via ω· : O˜U → ΩS/A|˜U .N o w F1(E)a n d E/F1(E)m a y
be identiﬁed with O˜U .T h u s ,ω is precisely the diﬀerential obtained by considering the
Kodaira-Spencer morphism
F1(E)= O˜U → Ω ˜U/ A ⊗ (E/F1(E)) = Ω˜U/ A
Now let Rz be the complete local ring which is the completion atz of U.L e tRPD
z be
the p-adic completion of the PD-envelope ofRz at the augmentation idealRz → A deﬁned
by z. Now taking the inverse limit of the uω,n’s deﬁnes a unit
uω ∈ (RPD
z )×
whose image in the residue ﬁeld k is 1. Thus, we can consider log(uω) ∈ RPD
z .
On the other hand, let Pz = P(z∗E)= P(Eω). Let σF : S → Pz (respectively, σV :
S → Pz) denote the section determined by the subspaceEF ⊆ Eω (respectively, EV ⊆ Eω).
The trivializations discussed previously deﬁne an isomorphism of the tangent space to Pz
at σF with A. Thus, in summary, we get an isomorphism ψ : Pz ∼= P1 by sending σF
(respectively, σV ) to inﬁnity (respectively, zero) and using the trivialization of tangent
space to σF to remove the remaining multiplicative ambiguity. LetPRPD
z = P(E)|Spf(RPD
z ).
Then ∇ E gives an isomorphism
ΞP : PRPDz
∼= RPD
z ⊗A Pz
which, when composed with ψ, gives an isomorphism μ : PRPD
z
∼= P1
RPDz
.N o wb yT h e o r e m
1.7, it follows that the Hodge section (deﬁned by F1(E) →E )
σ : Spf(RPD
z ) → PRPD
z
∼= P1
RPD
z
is (in terms of the standard coordinate t on P1, which vanishes at zero and has a pole at
inﬁnity) simply log( uω). (Indeed, Theorem 1.7 tells us that this is true after restriction
to any A-valued point of RPD
z ; hence it must be true over RPD
z .) It thus follows that the
pull-back of the diﬀerential dt on P1 via σ is simply ω′ def
= duω/uω. But, tracing through
all the deﬁnitions, the pull-back of dt via the Hodge section is exactly the Kodaira-Spencer
morphism of the Hodge ﬁltration. Thus, we conclude that ω = ω′ over RPD
z . On the other
hand, it is clear that this implies that ω = ω′ over all of ˜U (since O˜U → RPD
z is injective).
Thus, we have proven the following
Theorem 1.8. We have ω = duω/uω = ω′ over ˜U.
96

Note that this holds (by descent) without the assumption that k is algebraically closed.
Canonical Liftings of Points in Characteristic p
Let α1 ∈ S(A)b ea n A-valued point of S. Suppose we apply Φ to α1 to obtain an
A-valued point β1 ∈ S(A). Then since Φ is a Frobenius lifting, it induces zero on the
morphism on cotangent spaces modulo p.T h u s ,β1(mod p2) depends only on α1(mod p).
Let α2 =Φ −1
A (β1). Thus, α2 ≡ α1(mod p), and α2 depends only on α1(mod p). If we then
continue in this fashion, deﬁning
αi+1
def
=Φ −1
A Φ(αi)
it is clear that αi ≡ α1(mod p) for all i ≥ 1, and that the sequence {αi} of points in S(A)
converges p-adically. Let α∞ ∈ S(A) be the limit of this sequence. Let α0 ∈ S(k)b et h e
reduction of α1 modulo p. Note that we have
Φ(α∞ )= αF
∞
and that, moreover, α∞ is the unique A-valued point of S which has this property and is
equal to α0 modulo p.
Deﬁnition 1.9. We shall call α∞ the canonical lifting of α0. We shall call an A-valued
point of S which is a canonical lifting of some k-valued point a canonical A-valued point
of S.
All the canonical extensions that we have deﬁned become trivial when restricted to α∞ .
More precisely,
Proposition 1.10. If α0 ∈ U(k), then the restriction of uω to α∞ is 1.
Proof. Indeed, the Hodge ﬁltration of P is invariant under Φ, so its restriction to α∞
is still Frobenius invariant. By the theory of ﬁltered Dieudonn´e modules with Frobenius
action over A = W(k), it thus follows that the extension of p-divisible groups that one
obtains is trivial. Thus, by Kummer theory, uω |α∞ =1 . ⃝
Canonical Multiplicative Parameters
Let us assume just in this subsection that k is algebraically closed.L e t z ∈ S(k)b e
a k-valued point of S.L e t Slog
z be the completion of Slog at z.T h u s ,Slog
z is Spf of a
complete local ring Rz which is noncanonically isomorphic to
97

A[[t1,... ,td]]
with the restriction of the divisor D deﬁned by t1 · t2 · ... · ti (where i may be zero). Then
if we restrict Ωet
Φ to Slog
z , we obtain the trivial local system.
Let ω ∈ Ωet
Φ have integral residuesat all the irreducible components ofD, and nonzero
reduction modulo p.T h u s ,ω deﬁnes a surjection
ω(−):Θ et
Φ → Zp
If we apply ω(−) to our canonical extension of p-divisible groups
0 → Θet
Φ (1) ⊗Zp Qp/Zp → GΦ → Qp/Zp → 0
we obtain an extension of Qp/Zp by Qp/Zp(1) over Uz
def
= Sz |U . By Kummer theory, we
thus obtain a “logarithmic unit”
qω,z ∈ Rz[ 1
t1
,... , 1
ti
]×
which is well-deﬁned up to multiplication by a Teichm¨uller representative of an element of
k.I f ω has residue ej at the component of D deﬁned by tj, then the valuation of qω,z at
(tj)i se q u a lt oej. Indeed, this follows from the formula dqω,z /qω,z = ω (of Theorem 1.8).
Next, let us consider Φ −1(qω,z ). Since Φ −1 multiplies dqω,z /qω,z = ω,a sw e l la st h e
canonical extension of p-divisible groups by p, it follows that Φ−1(qω,z )= λ·qp
ω,z ,f o rs o m e
λ ∈ [k×] (where the brackets mean “the Teichm¨uller representative of”). On the other
hand, because Φ is a Frobenius lifting, reducing modulo p shows that λ =1 . T h u s ,w e
have that
Φ−1(qω,z )= qp
ω,z
Deﬁnition 1.11. We shall call qω,z for such an ω a canonical multiplicative parameter
associated to Φlog.
Canonical Aﬃne Coordinates
In this subsection, k need not be algebraically closed. Let α ∈ U(A)b e canonical.
Let Aα be the p-adic completion of the PD-envelope of S at the subscheme Im(α). Let
ϵα : Aα → A be the augmentation that deﬁnes the point α.L e t I =K e r (ϵα). The
A-algebra structure, together with the augmentation ϵα deﬁne a splitting
98

Aα = A ⊕I
which we shall call the augmentation splitting of Aα. N o t et h a tw eh a v ea nA-linear
Frobenius action
ΦA :( Aα)F →A α
induced by the Frobenius lifting Φ. Moreover, Φ A preserves the augmentation splitting,
as well as the ring structure of Aα.
Let us consider theslopes of this Frobenius action ΦA. Clearly, ΦA acts on A⊕0 ⊆A α
as ΦA. Next, we note that since Φ A is a Frobenius lifting, it maps I into p ·I .T h u s ,w e
have
ΦA(I[j]) ⊆ pj ·I [j]
where the superscript in brackets denotes the divided power. By the deﬁnition of an
ordinary Frobenius lifting, Ω α
def
= I/I[2] has constant slope one. Thus, if we divide Φ A
restricted to Ωα by p, we obtain an isomorphism
(Ωα)F → Ωα
Next, let us consider the A-submodule Ωcan ⊆I which is the closure (in the p-adic
topology) of the intersection of the images of (1
p ·ΦA|I)N (for all N ≥ 1). Since I/I[2] has
slope 1, it is clear that the projection Ω can → Ωα is surjective. Now let us consider the
intersection of Ωcan with I[2].L e t φ =( 1
p · ΦA|I)N (ψ), where ψ ∈I .I f φ is contained in
I[2] modulo pN ,t h e ns i n c eI/I[2] has slope 1, it follows that ψ must also be contained in
I[2] modulo pN .B u t t h e nφ =( 1
p ·ΦA|I)N (ψ) must be zero modulopN . Thus, we conclude
that the projection Ωcan → Ωα must be an isomorphism. Inverting this isomorphism, we
thus get a canonical morphism
κA :Ω α ↪→A α
Let Sα be the formal scheme which is the p-adic completion of the PD-envelope in S of
the image of α ∈ U(A). Let Θ α be the dual A-module to Ω α.L e t Θ aﬀ
α be the p-adic
completion of the PD-envelope at the origin of the aﬃne space modeled on Θα.T h u s ,Θaﬀ
α
is Spf of the p-adic completion of the PD-envelope of the symmetric algebra (over A)o f
Ωα at the augmentation ideal. We may then reinterpret the canonical morphismκA as an
isomorphism
Ucan :Θ aﬀ
α → Sα
99

We thus see that we have proven the following result:
Theorem 1.12. For every choice of a canonicalα ∈ U(A), we obtain a local uniformiza-
tion (canonically associated to Φ)
Ucan :Θ aﬀ
α ∼= Sα
of S by the aﬃne space modeled on Θα.
Deﬁnition 1.13. We shall call the elements of the image ofκA canonical aﬃne parameters
associated to Φ at α.
Now let (B, mB) be a local ring with residue ﬁeld k which is p-adically complete and
has a topologically nilpotent PD-structure onmB.L e tβ ∈ S(B)b es u c ht h a tβ(mod mB) ∈
S(k)i se q u a lt oα(mod p) ∈ S(k). Let Sβ be the p-adic completion of the PD-envelope of
S ⊗A B at the image of β in S(B). Thus, Sβ ∼= Sα ˆ⊗AB.L e tBβ = Aα ˆ⊗AB. By tensoring
the canonical morphism κA constructed above with B, we thus obtain a morphism
κB :( Ωα)B
def
=( Ωα) ⊗A B →B β
Let ϵβ : Bβ → B be the augmentation corresponding to the point β ∈ S(B). Let Iβ =
Ker(β). Let
Bβ = B ⊕I β
be the splitting deﬁned by ϵβ and the B-algebra structure on Bβ. Let us consider the
projections of κB on these two factors:
κ0
B :( Ωα)B → B; κ1
B :( Ωα)B →I β
Let Ωβ = Iβ/I[2]
β .I fw ec o m p o s eκ1
B with the projection to Ωβ, we thus obtain a morphism
Ψαβ :( Ωα)B → Ωβ
which is an isomorphism, since it is an isomorphism modulo mB,w h e r eβ coincides with
α(mod p). Let Θ β the dual B-module to Ω β. Now we may regard κ0
B as an element
of (Θ α)B; if we apply (Ψ ∨
αβ )−1, then we get an element of κβ ∈ Θβ, hence ∈ mB · Θβ
(since ϵβ ≡ (ϵα)B modulo mB). On the other hand, if we compose κ1
B with Ψ −1
αβ ,w eg e ta
morphism Ωβ →B β which gives us an isomorphism
100

Uβ :Θ aﬀ
β → Sβ
In summary, we have proven the following result:
Theorem 1.14. For every β ∈ S(B) as above, we obtain a canonical classκβ ∈ mB · Θβ,
as well as a local uniformization
Uβ :Θ aﬀ
β ∼= Sβ
of S by the aﬃne space modeled on Θβ. Moreover, this uniformization is related to the
canonical uniformization by tensoring over A with B, applying the isomorphism
(Ψ ∨
αβ )−1 :( Θα)B → Θβ
and then translating by κβ. Finally, for all β ∈ S(B) whose reductions modulo mB are
equal to α(mod p), the correspondenceβ ↦→ κβ is a bijection of such β onto mB · Θβ.
Proof. All the statements except the last follow from the way we constructed the ob-
jects involved. The last statement about the bijection follows from simply evaluating the
canonical uniformization of Theorem 1.12 on B-valued points. ⃝
Finally, we remark (relative to the analogy between Frobenius liftings and K¨ ahler
metrics) that these canonical aﬃne parameters are like canonical coordinates for a real
analytic K¨ahler metric.
The Relationship Between Aﬃne and Multiplicative Parameters
Let us continue with the notation of the preceding subsection, but let us assume in
addition that k is algebraically closed, so that the canonical multiplicative parameters are
deﬁned. Let ω ∈ Ω
et
Φ have integral residues at all the irreducible components of D,a n d
nonzero reduction modulo p.S i n c e Ωet
Φ ⊆ Ωα, we may also regard ω as an element of
Ωα. Then we would like to establish the relationship between the canonical multiplicative
parameter qω,α and the canonical aﬃne parameter κA(ω).
First note that by Proposition 1.10,qω,α evaluated atα is a Teichm¨uller representative.
Thus, log(qω,α ) ∈A α is zero at α,a si s κA(ω) ∈A α.M o r e o v e r ,d log(qω,α )= ω,b y
Theorem 1.8. On the other hand, the fact that dκ A(ω)= ω is a tautology. Thus,
log(qω,α )a n dκA(ω) have the same derivative and both vanish at α. We thus obtain the
following result:
101

Theorem 1.15. We have κA(ω)=l o g (qω,α ) in Aα.
§2. Construction of the Canonical Frobenius Lifting
In this Chapter, we shall denote by M
log
g,r the p-adic formal stack of r-pointed stable
curves of genusg overZp. We shall denote the reductions of objects overZp to Fp or Z/p2Z
by means of a subscriptedFp or Z/p2Z.L e t(N
ord
g,r )Fp → (Mg,r)Fp be the ´etale morphism
in characteristic p of Chapter II, §3. Thus, ( N
ord
g,r )Fp parametrizes pairs consisting of an
r-pointed stable curve of genus g in characteristic p, together with an ordinary, nilpotent
indigenous bundle. Let N
ord
g,r → Mg,r be the unique ´etale morphism of p-adic formal
schemes that lifts ( N
ord
g,r )Fp → (Mg,r)Fp .T h u s ,N
ord
g,r is a smooth p-adic formal scheme
over Zp whose reduction modulo p is (N
ord
g,r )Fp . Our goal in this Section is to construct a
canonical ordinary lifting of Frobenius on N
ord
g,r .
Modular Frobenius Liftings
In this subsection, we reinterpret certain constructions from Chapter II,§1, in terms of
liftings of the Frobenius morphism on (Mg,r)Fp .L e tS → (Mg,r)Fp be ´etale, and let Slog
be the log scheme obtained by pulling back the log structure ofM
log
g,r. Thus, in particular,
S is smooth over Fp.L e t Φ Slog : Slog → Slog be the absolute Frobenius morphism.
Since (Mg,r)Fp ⊆ (Mg,r)Z/p2 Z is deﬁned by a nilpotent ideal, the ´etale morphism S →
(Mg,r)Fp lifts naturally to an ´etale morphism ˜S → (Mg,r)Z/p2 Z.W e l e t ˜Slog be the
log scheme obtained by pulling back the log structure of ( Mg,r)Z/p2 Z. We shall call a
Frobenius lifting on ˜Slog a log morphism ˜Slog → ˜Slog whose reduction modulo p is equal
to ΦSlog . Note that by assigning to ´etale morphisms U → S the set of Frobenius liftings
on ˜Ulog, we obtain a sheaf L on the ´etale site of S, with the natural structure of a torsor
over ΘΦ
Slog
def
=Φ ∗
SΘSlog ,w h e r eΘSlog is the dual vector bundle to the sheaf of logarithmic
diﬀerentials on Slog. Moreover, this torsor naturally admits a connection ∇ L as follows:
Consider the sheaf of bianalytic functions OSbi on Slog. The image IS
Φ of the Frobenius
morphism Φ Sbi : OSbi →O Sbi is equal to iL(Φ−1
S OS), as well as to iR(Φ−1
S OS)( w h e r e
iL,iR : OS →O Sbi are the left and right injections). Thus, the pull-back of the sheaf
L by either iL or iR is equal to the sheaf of liftings of IS
Φ to a Z/p2Z-ﬂat subalgebra of
O ˜Sbi . This gives a connection ∇ L on the Θ Φ
Slog -torsor L→ S which is compatible with
the natural connection on ΘΦ
Slog (for which sections of Φ−1
S ΘSlog are horizontal); also, one
checks easily that ∇ L is integrable.
Now let us recall the Θ Φ
Slog -torsor D→ S that we deﬁned in Chapter II, §1. Let
flog : Xlog → Slog be the pull-back to Slog of the universal curve over (M
log
g,r)Fp . Recall
102

then that D is the ΘΦ
Slog -torsor consisting of liftings of the curve (Xlog)F = Xlog ×Slog,ΦSlog
Slog → Slog to an ˜S-ﬂat curve ˜Y log → ˜Slog. Note that it follows immediately from the
deﬁnition of the classifying log stack M
log
g,r (plus the fact that S → Mg,r is ´etale)t h a tw e
have an isomorphism
α : D→L
of ΘΦ
Slog -torsors given by considering the classifying map of the lifting ˜Y log → ˜Slog (which
is, by deﬁnition, a Frobenius lifting on ˜Slog). On the other hand, the theory of Chap-
ter II, §1, gives a natural connection ∇ D on D→ S as follows. Recall the line bundle
T
def
=( Φ Xlog/Slog )∗(τXlog/Slog )F on Xlog. By declaring the sections of the τXlog/Slog inside
the deﬁnition of T to be horizontal, we see thatT gets a natural connection ∇ T over Xlog
(i.e., not just in the relative sense forflog : Xlog → Slog). Thus, the de Rham cohomology
module R1fDR,∗(T ) has a Gauss-Manin connection ∇GM on Slog. By Chapter II, Propo-
sition 1.1, we have a natural surjection R1fDR,∗(T ) →O S, which one veriﬁes easily to be
horizontal. Since, by Chapter II, Proposition 1.2, D is just the sheaf of sections of this
surjection R1fDR,∗(T ) →O S, it thus follows that, as such, D gets a natural connection
(induced by ∇GM), which we shall call ∇ D.
Proposition 2.1. The isomorphism α is horizontal with respect to ∇ D and ∇ L.
Proof. Let us denote by XL (respectively, XR) the pull-back of flog : Xlog → Slog via
iL : OS →O Sbi (respectively, iR : OS →O Sbi )t o Sbi. Thus, we obtain a diagram over
Sbi:
XL ←X bi → XR
Let us denote the left-pointing (respectively, right-pointing) arrow byπL (respectively, πR).
Similarly, we have an analogous diagram with tildes, for the various objects over Z/p2Z.
Now consider the image of Frobenius IS
Φ ⊆O Sbi . We also have the image of the absolute
Frobenius on X, which we denote by IX
Φ ⊆O Xbi . Note that IX
Φ actually sits inside both
OXL and OXR .
Suppose next that we are given aZ/p2Z-ﬂat subalgebra ˜IS
Φ ⊆O ˜Sbi that lifts IS
Φ .T h i s
corresponds to a section η of LL = LR. (Here the superscript “ L”’s and “R”’s denote
left and right pull-backs to Sbi, respectively.) The obstruction to lifting IX
Φ to a Z/p2Z-
ﬂat subalgebra of O ˜XL compatible with ˜IS
Φ deﬁnes a class in R1(fL)∗(T L), which is, by
deﬁnition, equal to ξ[L]
def
=( αL)−1(η). Similarly, we obtain a class ξ[R]
def
=( αR)−1(η).
Note that (πL)−1(ξ[L]) = ( πR)−1(ξ[R]), since both classes are the obstruction to lifting
IX
Φ to a Z/p2Z-ﬂat subalgebra of OXbi compatible with ˜IS
Φ. Let us call this common class
ξ[bi].
103

Now suppose that ( ˜I′)S
Φ ⊆O ˜S is a Z/p2Z-ﬂat lifting of IS
Φ . Suppose that this lift-
ing corresponds to a section ζ of L. If we then take η = ζL (in the previous para-
graph), we get ξ[bi] = ( πL)−1{(α−1(ζ))L}, and, similarly, if we take η = ζR,w eg e t
ξ[bi] = (πR)−1{(α−1(ζ))R}. On the one hand, ∇ D(α−1(ζ)) is computed by subtracting
these two ξ[bi]’s. On the other hand, (by the deﬁnition of the Θ Φ
Slog -torsor structure on
D) the diﬀerence between these two ξ[bi]’s is the diﬀerence between the two classifying
morphisms given by the subalgebras {(˜I′)S
Φ }L and {(˜I′)S
Φ }R of OSbi . But this diﬀerence
is, by deﬁnition, ∇ L(ζ). This completes the proof. ⃝
Henceforth, we shall identify ( D, ∇ D)w i t h(L, ∇ L), and call the resulting torsor with
connection (D, ∇ D) (since the notation L is more natural for line bundles).
Indigenous Sections of D
We continue with the notation of the previous subsection. Thus, S → Mg,r is ´etale,
a n dw eh a v et h eΘΦ
Slog -torsor D→ S, with its connection ∇ D.L e t π : D → S be the
scheme corresponding to this torsor. Thus,D is a twisted version of Spec of the symmetric
algebra of the dual of ΘΦ
Slog . We endow D with the log structure pulled back from S;t h i s
gives us a log stackDlog.O n D, taking the dual to the second fundamental exact sequence
for diﬀerentials gives a sequence of tangent bundles:
0 → ΘΦ
Slog |D → ΘDlog → ΘSlog |D → 0
where Θ Dlog is the logarithmic tangent bundle on Dlog. We shall denote the surjection
ΘDlog → ΘSlog |D by Θπ. The connection ∇ D then deﬁnes a connection ∇D on the ﬁber
bundle π : D → S, hence a section ∇Θ :Θ Slog |D → ΘDlog of Θπ.
Now let us suppose that we are given a section σ : S → D of π.T h e nσ induces a
section of σ∗Θπ, which we denote by Θσ :Θ Slog → σ∗ΘDlog .A l s o ,σ deﬁnes an FL-bundle
(E, ∇ E) (see Chapter II, §1) on the curve Xlog.
Deﬁnition 2.2. We shall call the section σ indigenous if the projectivization of the
FL-bundle on Xlog deﬁned by σ is an indigenous bundle on Xlog.
Let us assume that σ is indigenous. Then we obtain, for i =1 ,2, canonical morphisms of
vector bundles
φi : σ∗ΘDlog → ΘSlog
deﬁned functorially as follows. By means of the ´etale morphism S → Mg,r, we can think
of the geometric vector bundle σ∗ΘDlog on S as parametrizing inﬁnitesimal deformations
η′ = {(Xlog)′,(E′, ∇ E′ )} of the curve plus FL-bundle pair given by η = {Xlog,(E, ∇ E )}.
104

Then the obstruction to lifting the Hodge ﬁltration of ( E′, ∇ E′ )|X =( E, ∇ E) (which exists
since σ is indigenous) to a ﬁltration of E′ over X′ deﬁnes a section of Θ Slog ,w h i c hw et a k e
for φ2(η′). On the other hand, if we think in terms of crystals, then ( E′, ∇ E′ ) also deﬁnes
a deformation ( E′′, ∇ E′′ )o f( E, ∇ E)o n X[ϵ]/(ϵ2). The obstruction to lifting the Hodge
ﬁltration of ( E, ∇ E) to a ﬁltration of E′′ on X[ϵ]/(ϵ2) deﬁnes a section of Θ Slog ,w h i c hw e
take for φ1(η′). Since, σ∗Θπ(η′) is simply the diﬀerence between ( Xlog)′ and the trivial
deformation of Xlog, we thus see that
σ∗Θπ = φ2 − φ1
We also have that
φ1 ◦σ∗∇Θ =0
Indeed, sorting through the deﬁnitions, one sees that the image of ∇Θ consists of the
η′ = {(Xlog)′,(E′, ∇ E′ )} obtained by letting (E′, ∇ E′ ) be the FL-bundle given by regarding
(E, ∇ E) as a crystal and taking the bundle with connection that this crystal induces on the
deformation (Xlog)′.T h u s , (E′′, ∇ E′′ ) is simply the trivial deformation of ( E, ∇ E), hence
is indigenous on Xlog by assumption. Putting the above two formulas together, we thus
obtain that
φ2 ◦σ∗∇Θ =i dΘSlog
Also, let us note that
φ2 ◦Θσ =0
since if it were nonzero, it would measure exactly the extent to whichσ fails to stay within
the indigenous locus of D, but, by assumption, σ does stay within the indigenous locus.
Next, let us recall the morphism Φτ
E :Θ Φ
Slog → ΘSlog , i.e., the dual to the “inﬁnitesimal
Verschiebung” of Chapter II, §2. Recall that this morphism was constructed by applying
R1f∗ to the morphism T→ τXlog/Slog given by composing thep-curvature P : T→ Ad(E)
of E with the projection Ad( E) → τXlog/Slog arising from the Hodge ﬁltration. It thus
follows immediately from the deﬁnitions (by thinking about how one deﬁnes the obstruction
that φ1 measures) that if we restrict φ1 : σ∗ΘDlog → ΘSlog to ΘΦ
Slog ⊆ σ∗ΘDlog ,w eg e t
φ1|ΘΦ
Slog
=Φ τ
E
So far we have been thinking about morphisms that one can obtain fromσ by thinking
about the indigenous FL-bundle (E, ∇ E) that it deﬁnes. But by what we did in the previous
subsection, σ also deﬁnes a Frobenius lifting Φ σ : ˜Slog → ˜Slog. Let us consider the
105

morphism ΘΦσ :Θ Slog → ΘΦ
Slog obtained by looking at the morphism induced by Φ σ on
the tangent bundles, and then dividing byp. On the other hand, the morphism Θσ −σ∗∇Θ :
ΘSlog → σ∗ΘDlog maps into ΘΦ
Slog ⊆ σ∗ΘDlog . Thus, by abuse of notation, we shall regard
Θσ − σ∗∇Θ as a morphism ΘSlog → ΘΦ
Slog . Then we claim that
ΘΦσ =Θ σ − σ∗∇Θ
Indeed, if we think ofσ∗∇Θ as deﬁning a direct sum splitting of σ∗ΘDlog ,t h e nΘσ − σ∗∇Θ
is just the component of Θσ that sits in the vertical subspace ΘΦ
Slog ⊆ σ∗ΘDlog . Put another
way, Θσ −σ∗∇Θ :Θ Slog → ΘΦ
Slog is the Kodaira-Spencer morphism for the sectionσ relative
to the connection ∇D. Thus, it follows from the deﬁnition of the connection called ∇ L in
the previous subsection in terms of subalgebras of OSbi that ΘΦσ =Θ σ − σ∗∇Θ .
We are now ready to prove the main technical result of this subsection:
Proposition 2.3. If σ : S → D is an indigenous section, then −Φτ
E is inverse to ΘΦσ .I n
particular, the indigenous bundle associated to (E, ∇ E) is ordinary.
Proof. Indeed, using the various observations made above, we simply compute:
Φτ
E ◦ΘΦσ = φ1 ◦(Θσ − σ∗∇Θ )
= φ1 ◦Θσ
=( φ1 − φ2) ◦Θσ
= −(σ∗Θπ) ◦Θσ
= −idΘSlog
Thus, in particular Φ τ
E is an isomorphism, and so ( E, ∇ E) deﬁnes an ordinary nilpotent
indigenous bundle. ⃝
Frobenius Invariant Indigenous Bundles
In this subsection, we change notation slightly. Let S → N
ord
g,r be an ´etale morphism
of a p-adic formal schemeS into N
ord
g,r .T h u s ,S is formally smooth overZp. Also, one may
think of S → N
ord
g,r as the unique ´etale lifting of its reduction SFp → (N
ord
g,r )Fp modulo
p. For convenience, we assume that SFp is aﬃne. Endow S with the log structure pulled
back from M
log
g,r.T h u s ,w eg e tap-adic formal log scheme Slog. Pulling back the universal
curve over Mg,r, we get a morphism flog : Xlog → Slog.L e t hlog : Y log → Slog be an
r-pointed curve of genusg whose reduction modulo p is equal to (Xlog)F
Fp → Slog
Fp , i.e., the
Frobenius transform offlog
Fp . We shall denote the divisor of marked points onY by E ⊆ Y .
106

Let n ≥ 2 be a natural number. Suppose that we have a coherent sheaf with connec-
tion (F, ∇ F )o n Y log,w h e r eF is killed by pn and ﬂat over Z/pnZ, and the connection
∇ F is relative to the morphism hlog : Y log → Slog. Suppose, moreover, that we are given
aﬁ l t r a t i o nF1(F)Fp ⊆F Fp of the reduction of F modulo p. We shall call this ﬁltration
the Hodge ﬁltration. Then, relative to this data, we deﬁne the coherent sheaf with con-
nection F∗(F, ∇ F ) as follows. First, we regard ( F, ∇ F ) as a crystal on Crys( Y log
Fp /Slog).
Thus, if we apply the relative Frobenius morphism ΦXlog/Slog to this crystal (F, ∇ F ), we
obtain a crystal ( F, ∇ F )′ def
=Φ ∗
Xlog/Slog (F, ∇ F )o nC r y s (Xlog
Fp /Slog). Next, we consider
the subsheaf Φ ∗
Xlog/Slog F1(F)Fp ⊆F ′
Fp . If we then consider the subsheaf of ( F, ∇ F )′
on Crys(Xlog
Fp /Slog) consisting of sections whose reduction modulo p is contained in the
subsheaf Φ∗
Xlog/Slog F1(F)Fp ,w eo b t a i nac r y s t a l(F, ∇ F )′′ on Crys(Xlog
Fp /Slog). We then
let
F∗(E, ∇ E)
def
=( F, ∇ F )′′ ⊗Zp Z/pn−1Z
Deﬁnition 2.4. We shall callF∗(F, ∇ F )t h erenormalized Frobenius pull-back of(F, ∇ F ).
Note that if F is a vector bundle on YZ/pnZ,a n dF1(F)Fp is a vector bundle on YFp ,w i t h
the injection F1(F)Fp ↪→F Fp locally split, it follows immediately from the deﬁnitions that
the coherent sheaf F∗(F) appearing in F∗(F, ∇ F ) is a vector bundle on XZ/pn−1Z. Note
also that, if we think of the “input variable” (F, ∇ F )a sa crystal on Crys(Y log
Fp /Slog), then
F∗(F, ∇ F ) does not depend on the choice of the deformation hlog : Y log → Slog of Y log
Fp .
Often, we will be given a Frobenius lifting Φlog : Slog
Z/pn Z → Slog
Z/pn Z modulo pn,a n dw e
will takeY log
Z/pnZ → Slog
Z/pn Z (respectively, (F, ∇ F )) to be the pull-back ofXlog
Z/pnZ → Slog
Z/pn Z
(respectively, some (E, ∇ E)o n Xlog)b yΦ log.I f S were the spectrum of the ring of Witt
vectors of a perfect ﬁeld k,a n d n = 2, then the F∗(E, ∇ E)F that we have deﬁned here
would coincide with the F∗(E, ∇ E) of Chapter II, Deﬁnition 2.9.
Now let (F, ∇ F ) be a vector bundle with connection on Y log
Z/pnZ whose determinant
is trivial and which is indigenous modulo pn−1. We will denote its Hodge ﬁltration by
F1(F)Z/pn−1 Z ⊆F Z/pn−1 Z. Let us denote by ( G, ∇ G) the vector bundle with connection
on XZ/pn−1 Z which is the renormalized Frobenius pull-back of ( F, ∇ F ). Suppose, more-
over, that (G, ∇ G)F
Fp
∼= (F, ∇ F )Fp . Thus, one sees (as in the proof of Chapter II, Propo-
sition 2.10) that (F, ∇ F )Fp is nilpotent and admissible (hence corresponds, by Chapter II,
Proposition 2.5, to some FL-bundle).
Lemma 2.5. Let n ≥ 3. If we modify the connection ∇ F by some pn−2θ,w h e r eθ is a
section of h∗(ωlog
Y/S )⊗2(−E), then the vector bundle F∗(F) (on XZ/pn−1Z), along with its
connection F∗(∇ F ), remain unchanged.
107

Proof. Looking at the deﬁnition of the renormalized Frobenius pull-back, one sees that
the pair ( F∗(F),F∗(∇ F )) is constructed by pulling back F (and ∇ F ) via various local
liftings of Φ Xlog/Slog , and then gluing together by means of gluing morphisms deﬁned
by the connection ∇ F . Moreover, these gluing morphisms are obtained from the Taylor
expansion (cf. [Falt], §2, Theorem 2.3), which involves applying the connection ∇ F to
tangent vectors pushed forward from the Frobenius lifting. Since such tangent vectors are
necessarily divisible by p (as well as being annihilated, of course, by p
n), it follows that
a knowledge of (∇ F )Z/pn−1 Z suﬃces to compute these Taylor expansions. Thus, certainly
F∗(F) depends at most on ( ∇ F )Z/pn−1 Z. On the other hand, since at the end of the
construction of F∗(F), we mod out by pn−1 · Φ∗
Xlog/Slog F1(F)Fp ⊆ pn−1 · Φ∗
Xlog/Slog FFp ,
we see that modifying ∇ F by an endomorphism-valued diﬀerential whose image lies inside
pn−2 · F1(F)( w h e r ew eh a v epn−2 rather than pn−1 since we always get an extra factor
of p from the fact that we are applying the connection to tangent vectors divisible by p)
does not aﬀect the result. This completes the proof. ⃝
Now let us assume that ( F, ∇ F ) is a rank two vector bundle on YZ/pnZ with a con-
nection (relative to hlog : Y log → Slog), whose determinant is trivial. Let us suppose,
moreover, that (F, ∇ F )Z/pn−1 Z is indigenous.L e t (G, ∇ G)= F∗(F, ∇ F ). As before, we
assume that (G, ∇ G)F
Fp
∼= (F, ∇ F )Fp . Then by considering the result of applyingF∗ to var-
ious deformations (F, ∇ F )′ of (F, ∇ F ) (i.e., such that (F, ∇ F )Z/pn−1 Z =( F, ∇ F )′
Z/pn−1Z)
to obtain various deformations (G, ∇ G)′ of (G, ∇ G), we obtain a morphism:
(R1fDR,∗Ad(E)Fp )F → R1fDR,∗Ad(G)Fp
∼= R1fDR,∗Ad(E)Fp
If we then compose this morphism with the projection
R1fDR,∗Ad(E)Fp → R1f∗(τXlog/Slog )Fp
arising from the Hodge ﬁltration, we obtain a morphism
(R1fDR,∗Ad(E)Fp )F → R1f∗(τXlog/Slog )Fp
which, by Lemma 2.5, vanishes on the subbundle
(f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D))F
Fp ⊆ (R1fDR,∗Ad(E)Fp )F
arising from the Hodge ﬁltration. Thus, we obtain a morphism of vector bundles
Θ F∗ :( R1f∗(τXlog/Slog )Fp )F → R1f∗(τXlog/Slog )Fp
Note that by Lemma 2.5, this morphism remains unchanged if one adds some pn−2θ to
the connection ∇ F .
108

Lemma 2.6. The morphism Θ F∗ is equal to −Φτ
E.
Proof. In the gluing process referred to in the proof of Lemma 2.5, the deforming
cocycle in ( τXlog/Slog )F
Fp = pn−1(τXlog/Slog )F (mod pn) only aﬀects the Taylor expan-
sion to ﬁrst order. Moreover, this cocycle in ( τXlog/Slog )F
Fp is mapped to a cocycle in
Φ∗
Xlog/Slog (τXlog/Slog )F
Fp ↪→ Ad(G)Fp
∼= Ad(E)Fp , and hence to a cocyle in Ad( E)Fp .I f
we then further project this cocycle via Ad( E)Fp → (τXlog/Slog )Fp ,w eo b t a i nΘF∗ of the
original cocycle. On the other hand, let us note that by Chapter II, Proposition 1.4, the
inclusion Φ ∗
Xlog/Slog (τXlog/Slog )F
Fp ↪→ Ad(G)Fp =A d (E)Fp is −1t i m e st h ep-curvature of
(E, ∇ E)Fp .S i n c e Φτ
E is deﬁned by applying R1f∗ to the p-curvature composed with the
projection Ad(E)Fp → (τXlog/Slog )Fp , we thus obtain the result. ⃝
We are now ready to begin deﬁning a canonical Frobenius liftingon Slog, which will
be fundamental to the entire paper. First, note that since (Ng,r)Fp ⊆ (Sg,r)Fp ,w eh a v ea
tautological trivialization (τN )Fp :( Ng,r)ord
Fp → (Sg,r)Fp of the torsor Sg,r over (N
ord
g,r )Fp .
If we pull this trivialization back to S, we get a trivialization ( τS)Fp : SFp → (Sg,r)Fp ,
which thus deﬁnes a nilpotent, ordinary indigenous bundle (E, ∇ E)1 on Xlog
Fp . This indige-
nous bundle thus corresponds to an FL-bundle, hence a section of the torsor D (of the
previous subsection) overSFp , and hence a Frobenius lifting Φlog
2 : Slog
Z/p2Z → Slog
Z/p2 Z.N o w
let (E, ∇ E)′
2 be any indigenous bundle on Xlog
Z/p2Z that lifts (E, ∇ E)1. (Such a lifting exists
since SFp is aﬃne.) We shall deﬁne Y log inductively. Let Y log
Z/p2 Z = Xlog
Z/p2 Z ×Slog,Φlog
2
Slog.
Let (F, ∇ F )′
2 =( Φlog
2 )∗(E, ∇ E)′
2. Then it is a tautology that if we take F∗(F, ∇ F )′
2,w e
obtain (E, ∇ E)1 (up to tensor product with a line bundle with connection whose square
is trivial; as usual, for the sake of simplicity, we shall ignore this). So far, to summarize,
of the objects constructed so far, Φ log
2 ; Y log
Z/p2 Z;a n d( E, ∇ E)1 are canonical. The primed
objects are not canonical.
Let (F, ∇ F )′
3 be any rank two bundle with connection on Y log
Z/p3 Z whose determinant
is trivial, and whose reduction modulo p2 is equal to ( F, ∇ F )′
2.T h a t i s , (F, ∇ F )′
3 is a
deformation of (F, ∇ F )′
2. Now by Lemma 2.6, and the fact that ( E, ∇ E)1 is ordinary,i t
follows that, among all possible deformations (F, ∇ F )′
3 of (F, ∇ F )′
2, there exists a unique
(up to changing the connection by some p2 · θ) such deformation ( F, ∇ F )′′
3 such that
F∗(F, ∇ F )′′
3 is indigenous on Xlog
Z/p2 Z.L e t Y log
Z/p3Z be the unique deformation of Y log
Z/p2Z
such that when one evaluates the crystal ( F, ∇ F )′′
3 on Y log
Z/p3Z, it becomes indigenous.
Let ( E, ∇ E)2 = F∗(F, ∇ F )′′
3 . By Lemma 2.5, ( E, ∇ E)2 is independent of the choice of
(E, ∇ E)′
2 or (F, ∇ F )′′
3.L e t (F, ∇ F )2 =( Φlog
2 )∗(E, ∇ E)2.L e t Φlog
3 : Slog
Z/p3 Z → Slog
Z/p3 Z be
the classifying morphism of ther-pointed stable curve of genusg given byY log
Z/p3 Z → Slog
Z/p3 Z.
Thus, Φlog
3 lifts Φlog
2
. Again, to summarize, the objects Φlog
3
; Y log
Z/p3Z;a n d(E, ∇ E)2 (as well
as (F, ∇ F )2)a r ecanonical.I f w e n o w l e t (E, ∇ E)′
3 be an indigenous bundle on Xlog
Z/p3 Z
109

that lifts (E, ∇ E)2,a n d(F, ∇ F )′
3 =( Φlog
3 )∗(E, ∇ E)′
3 (where the primed bundles are newly
chosen here, hence diﬀerent from the temporary ones we chose before), it follows from
Lemma 2.5 that (E, ∇
E)2 ∼= F∗(F, ∇ F )′
3.
Continuing in this fashion (making repeated use of Lemmas 2.5 and 2.6, as well as
the fact that ( E, ∇ E)1 is ordinary), we thus obtain a canonical Frobenius lifting Φ log :
Slog → Slog (of p-adic formal schemes), as well as a canonical indigenous bundle ( E, ∇ E)
on Xlog such that F∗(Φlog)∗(E, ∇ E) ∼= (E, ∇ E) (up to tensor product with a line bundle
with connection whose square is trivial). Moreover, note that by Proposition 2.3, this
Frobenius lifting Φ
log is ordinary.
Deﬁnition 2.7. Let Ψlog : Slog → Slog be a Frobenius lifting. We shall call an indigenous
bundle (G, ∇ G)o n Xlog Frobenius invariant forΨlog if (G, ∇ G) ∼= F∗(Ψlog)∗(G, ∇ G)( u pt o
tensor product with a line bundle with connection whose square is trivial).
So far, we have been working over our aﬃne schemeS,w h i c hi s´etale over Mg,r. However,
since the objects that we have constructed (namely, Φ log and (E, ∇ E)) are canonical, i.e.
uniquely characterized by certain properties that have nothing special to do with S,i ti s
clear that they all descend to ( N
ord
g,r )log. We thus see that we have proven the following
key result:
Theorem 2.8. On (N
ord
g,r )log, there exists a canonical ordinary Frobenius lifting
Φlog
N :( N
ord
g,r )log → (N
ord
g,r )log
together with a canonical indigenous bundle (EN , ∇ EN ) on Clog (where Clog → N
ord
g,r is the
universal r-pointed curve of genus g) whose reduction modulo p is equal to the nilpotent,
ordinary indigenous bundle deﬁned by the tautological trivialization (τN )Fp of Sg,r over
N
ord
g,r . Moreover, the pair {Φlog
N ;( EN , ∇ EN )} is uniquely characterized by the following
properties:
(1) Φlog
N :( N
ord
g,r )log → (N
ord
g,r )log is a lifting of Frobenius;
(2) the reduction of (EN , ∇ EN ) modulo p is the bundle deﬁned by (τN )Fp ;
(3) (EN , ∇ EN ) is Frobenius invariant for Φlog
N .
Moreover, the formation of Φlog
N and (EN , ∇ EN ) is compatible with restriction to products
of N
ord
g,r ’s for smaller g’s and r’s that map into the boundary of our original N
ord
g,r via the
gluing procedure described at the end of Chapter I,§2.
110

Proof. We have proven everything except the last statement about restriction. To see
this, note ﬁrst of all that Φ log
N respects such products of smaller N
ord
g,r since it respects the
log structure of the original N
ord
g,r . Thus, we may restrict Φ log
N and (EN , ∇ EN ) to these
products, and the result follows by uniqueness. ⃝
Remark. This result is the central result of this paper. In some sense, the rest of the paper
is just devoted to making explicit a number of formal consequences of Theorem 2.8. In
particular, since this canonical Frobenius lifting is ordinary, it follows that we can apply
the theory of §1. We shall proceed to do this in the remainder of this Chapter.
Finally, it is useful to know that the formation of the canonical Frobenius and indige-
nous bundle are compatible with ﬁnite coverings. Suppose that S
log → (N
ord
g,r )log is log
´etale, with S formally smooth over Zp, and the log structure given by a relative divisor
with normal crossings over Zp.L e t flog : Xlog → Slog be the pull-back of the universal
curve over M
log
g,r.L e tq,s ≥ 0b es u c ht h a t2q − 2+ s ≥ 1. Let Y log → Slog be an s-pointed
stable curve of genus q. Suppose that we are given a morphism over Slog:
Y log φlog
−→ Xlog
Now we make the following:
Deﬁnition 2.9. We shall say that φlog is log admissible if it is ﬁnite, log ´etale, and takes
marked points to marked points.
A typical example of a log admissible morphism may be obtained by considering the
“admissible coverings” of [HM]. Indeed, it is not diﬃcult to see that by endowing the
curves involved (as well as the base) with appropriate log structures, one may obtain alog
admissible covering (cf. [Mzk], §3). (Note, however, that the deﬁnition of “log admissible”
given here diﬀers from that of [Mzk], §3.)
Let (E, ∇
E) be the restriction of the canonical indigenous bundle (EN , ∇ EN )t o Xlog.
Let Φlog : Slog → Slog be the pull-back of the Frobenius lifting Φlog
N to Slog (which exists
because Slog → (N
ord
g,r )log is log ´etale). Let (F, ∇ F )= φ∗(E, ∇ E). Observe that (F, ∇ F )Fp
is a nilpotent, admissible indigenous bundle on Y log. Let us assume that:
(*) (F, ∇ F )Fp is ordinary.
Then ( F, ∇ F )Fp determines a factorization of the classifying morphism Slog → M
log
q,s
through (N
ord
q,s )log. Thus, we get a morphism
κlog : Slog → (N
ord
q,s )log
111

For simplicity, let us writeTlog for (N
ord
q,s )log. Let us denote by Ψlog the canonical Frobenius
on (N
ord
q,s )log,a n db y(G, ∇ G) the canonical indigenous bundle on the universal s-pointed
stable curve of genus q over (N
ord
q,s )log. Then we have the following compatibility result:
Theorem 2.10. We have a commutative diagram:
Slog Φlog
−→ Slog
⏐⏐↓κlog
⏐⏐↓κlog
Tlog Ψlog
−→ Tlog
and an isomorphism κ∗(G, ∇ G) ∼= (F, ∇ F ).
Proof. We shall apply induction on i to the proposition “the Theorem is true when the
objects in it are reduced modulo pi.” The case i = 1 is clear. Thus, it suﬃces to prove the
induction step. Let us consider the crystals (F, ∇ F )Φ and κ∗(G, ∇ G)Ψ on Crys(Xlog
Fp /Slog).
Suppose that they agree modulo pi. If we apply F∗ (the renormalized Frobenius pull-
back) to them, we get the same crystal modulo pi, by the induction hypothesis and the
deﬁnition of the canonical Frobenii and indigenous bundles. Thus, by Lemma 2.6, it follows
that the underlying vector bundles of (F, ∇
F )Φ and κ∗(G, ∇ G)Ψ must agree modulo pi+1.
Since (F, ∇ F )Φ is indigenous on (Y log)Φ,a n dκ∗(G, ∇ G)Ψ is indigenous on the s-pointed
stable curve of genus q given by pulling back the universal one by Ψ log ◦κlog,w et h u s
obtain that the diagram in the Theorem commutes modulopi+1.T h e ns i n c e(F, ∇ F )a n d
κ∗(G, ∇ G) agree modulo pi, it follows that their underlying vector bundles agree modulo
pi+1. By a similar argument, their underlying vector bundles also agree modulo pi+2,a n d
the diagram commutes modulo pi+2. Then, by Lemma 2.5, since ( F, ∇ F ) ∼= F∗(F, ∇ F )Φ
and κ∗(G, ∇ G) ∼= κ∗F∗(G, ∇ G)Ψ , it follows that (F, ∇ F )a n dκ∗(G, ∇ G) agree modulo pi+1.
This completes the proof of the induction step. ⃝
§3. Applications of the Canonical Frobenius Lifting
In this Section, we apply the general theory of§1 to the canonical modular Frobenius
lifting constructed in §2. In particular, we deﬁne the notion of a p-adic quasiconformal
equivalence class, and show how the choice of such a class allows one to construct both
aﬃne and multiplicative uniformizations of Mg,r. We will also deﬁne the notion of a p-
adic topological marking, which will allow us to construct a local uniformization of Mg,r
by means of the aﬃne space of quadratic diﬀerentials. As we make these constructions,
we will compare them to various classical constructions in the complex case. Finally, we
will specialize what we have done in this Chapter to the case of elliptic curves (regarded
112

parabolically) to see that in this case, the canonical Frobenius lifting corresponds to a
well-known Frobenius lifting from Serre-Tate theory, and that, consequently, the various
objects constructed from it – i.e., canonical curves, modular uniformizations, etc. – reduce
to the corresponding objects of classical Serre-Tate theory.
Canonical Liftings of Curves over Witt Vectors
Let
N
ord
g,r ;Φ log
N be as in the last subsection of§2. Let k be aperfect ﬁeld of characteristic
p.L e t A = W(k), the ring of Witt vectors with coeﬃcients in k;l e tS =S p e c (A). Thus,
we have a natural Frobenius automorphism Φ A : A → A on A. Recall the notion of a
canonical liftings of A-valued points in N
ord
g,r (Deﬁnition 1.9).
Deﬁnition 3.1. We shall call a pointα0 ∈ N
ord
g,r (k)a (p-adic) quasiconformal equivalence
class (valued in k). We shall call an r-pointed stable curve of genus g the canonical curve
in the class α0 if it admits an indigenous bundle such that the pair consisting of the curve
and this indigenous bundle deﬁnes a canonical A-valued point of N
ord
g,r whose reduction
modulo p is α0.
Remark. Thus, a p-adic quasiconformal equivalence class consists of a hyperbolically ordi-
nary r-pointed stable curve (X0 → Spec(k);p1,... ,pr :S p e c (k) → X0)o fg e n u sg, together
with a choice of a nilpotent, ordinary indigenous bundle ( E, ∇ E)0 on Xlog
0 . Recall from
Chapter II, Proposition 3.13, that for a given ordinary Xlog
0 , there are at most p3g−3+r
possible choices for (E, ∇ E)0. The reason for attaching the term “quasiconformal” to this
data will become more and more apparent as we continue: Namely, unlike the complex case
in which, onceg and r are determined, all curves belong to the same quasiconformal equiv-
alence class, the uniformization theory that we shall develop in this paper in the p-adic
setting acts (by comparison to the classical complex case) as if there are many diﬀerent
quasiconformal equivalence classes (for a given g and r), and moreover, this equivalence
class is determined exactly by the datum of a point in
N
ord
g,r .
Specializing the theory of §1, we obtain:
Theorem 3.2. For every p-adic quasiconformal equivalence class α0 ∈ N
ord
g,r (k),t h e r e
exists a canonical lifting α∞ ∈ N
ord
g,r (A), i.e., more concretely, an r-pointed stable curve
(X → Spec(A);p1,... ,pr :S p e c (A) → X) of genus g, together with an indigenous (E, ∇ E)
on Xlog. This canonical lifting α∞ is uniquely characterized by the fact that it is ﬁxed
under Φ−1
A Φlog
N ,w h e r eΦlog
N is the canonical Frobenius lifting of Theorem 2.8.
Corollary 3.3. Suppose that the pair
113

{(X → Spec(A);p1,... ,pr :S p e c (A) → X); (E, ∇ E)}
is canonical (i.e., for (E, ∇ E), this means that it is the restriction of the (EN , ∇ EN ) of
Theorem 2.8). Then
(1) If X → Spec(A) is smooth, then (E, ∇ E) deﬁnes an MF∇ -object on
Xlog in the sense of [Falt], §2 (up to tensor product with a line bundle
whose square is trivial).
(2) More generally, ifX → Spec(A) is not smooth, then the pair is obtained
by gluing together (as at the end of Chapter I,§2) a collection of smooth
canonical pairs.
Proof. The two statements follow by specializing Theorem 2.8. ⃝
Corollary 3.4. Ap a i r
{(X → Spec(A);p1,... ,pr :S p e c (A) → X); (E, ∇ E)}
consisting of a smooth r-pointed curve of genus g and an indigenous bundle on Xlog is
canonical if and only if
(1) the indigenous bundle (E, ∇ E)Fp is ordinary;
(2) (E, ∇ E) deﬁnes an MF∇ -object on Xlog in the sense of [Falt], §2 (up
to tensor product with a line bundle whose square is trivial).
More generally, a pair consisting of anr-pointed stable curve of genusg and an indigenous
bundle on Xlog is canonical if and only if it is obtained by gluing together canonical pairs
as at the end of Chapter I, §2.
Proof. Let us ﬁrst consider the smooth case. By the previous Corollary, it suﬃces to prove
the “if” part. Since (E, ∇ E)i sa n MF∇ -object, we know (by Chapter II, Proposition 2.10)
that (E, ∇ E)Fp is nilpotent. Thus, there exists a canonical pair which is equal to our given
pair modulo p. On the other hand, it follows by the analogues of Lemmas 2.5 and 2.6 for
F∗ over S =S p e c (A) that there is only one lifting of our pair modulo p that admits an
indigenous bundle which is an MF∇ -object. Thus, our pair must be the canonical pair.
Next, we consider the stable case. Again, by the previous Corollary, it suﬃces to prove
the “if” part. As before, we note that there exists a canonical pair which is equal to our
given pair modulo p. By the previous Corollary, the canonical pair is obtained by gluing
together smooth canonical pairs. Since a smooth canonical lifting is unique, it thus follows
that our pair must be the canonical pair. ⃝
114

Corollary 3.5. Suppose that we have an r-pointed (respectively, s-pointed) stable curve
Xlog (respectively,Y log) of genus g (respectively,q) over Slog (for some appropriate choice
of log structure on Slog). Let (E, ∇ E) (respectively, (F, ∇ F )) be an indigenous bundle on
Xlog (respectively, Y log). Suppose that (F, ∇ F )Fp is ordinary. Let φlog : Y log → Xlog be
log admissible, and suppose that (F, ∇ F )= φ∗(E, ∇ E). Then the pair {Xlog;( E, ∇ E)} is
canonical if and only if the pair {Y log;( F, ∇ F )} is canonical.
Proof. First note that, by pulling back square diﬀerentials and considering Φω
E and Φω
F
,t h e
ordinariness of (F, ∇ F )Fp implies the ordinariness of (E, ∇ E)Fp . The stipulated conditions
on φlog imply that Xlog is obtained by gluing if and only if Y log is obtained by gluing.
We thus reduce to the smooth case. But this follows immediately, by the criterion of the
previous Corollary (about the indigenous bundle being anMF
∇ -object) and the fact that
F∗ commutes with log ´etale coverings. ⃝
Canonical Aﬃne Coordinates on Mg,r
We maintain the notation of the preceding subsection. Thus,S =S p e c (A); A = W(k);
and k is a perfect ﬁeld of characteristic p.L e t α ∈ N
ord
g,r (A)b e canonical. Since giving
a canonical α ∈ N
ord
g,r (A) is equivalent to giving the p-adic quasiconformal equivalence
class α(mod p) ∈ N
ord
g,r (k), we shall frequently abuse notation and speak of “the p-adic
quasiconformal equivalence class α.”
Let us assume that α corresponds to a smooth curve. Then applying Theorems 1.12
and 1.14 to the canonical Frobenius lifting of Theorem 2.8 gives the following results:
Theorem 3.6. For every choice of ap-adic quasiconformal equivalence classα, we obtain
a local canonical uniformization
Ucan :Θ aﬀ
α ∼= Mα
g,r
of Mg,r by the aﬃne space modeled on Θα.
Let (B, mB) be a local ring with residue ﬁeld k which is p-adically complete and has a
topologically nilpotent PD-structure on mB.
Deﬁnition 3.7. We shall say that β ∈ N
ord
g,r (B)i s in the (p-adic) quasiconformal equiva-
lence class α if the point β(mod mB) ∈ N
ord
g,r (k)i se q u a lt oα(mod p) ∈ N
ord
g,r (k).
In summary, we have proven the following result:
115

Theorem 3.8. For every β ∈ N
ord
g,r (B) in the quasiconformal equivalence class α,w e
obtain a canonical class κβ ∈ mB · Θβ, as well as a local uniformization
Uβ :Θ aﬀ
β ∼= Mβ
g,r
of Mg,r by the aﬃne space modeled onΘβ. Moreover, this uniformization is related to the
canonical uniformization by tensoring over A with B, applying the isomorphism
(Ψ ∨
αβ )−1 :( Θα)B → Θβ
and then translating by κβ. Finally, for all β ∈ N
ord
g,r (B) that lie in the quasiconformal
equivalence class α, the correspondenceβ ↦→ κβ is a bijection of such β onto mB · Θβ.
Remark. In considering the uniformizations just obtained, it is tempting to compare them
with the local uniformization by the aﬃne space modeled on the tangent space to Mg,r
given in the complex case by considering geodesics for the Teichm¨uller metric. We believe,
however, that if there is any proper complex analogue to the uniformizations of Theorems
3.6 and 3.8 at all, then it is the uniformization obtained by Bers coordinates. Indeed,
unlike the Teichm¨uller coordinates, which are real, but not complex analytic, the Bers
coordinates are (complex) analytic, just as the aﬃne coordinates of Theorems 3.6 and
3.8. Also, (perhaps more crucially) the Teichm¨uller coordinates are the same for elliptic
curves regarded either hyperbolically or parabolically. We shall soon see, however, that
the uniformizations analogous to those of Theorems 3.6 and 3.8 for elliptic curves treated
parabolically are diﬀerent from those in the hyperbolic case. One diﬀerence between the
Bers uniformization and the uniformizations of Theorems 3.6 and 3.8 is that the Bers
uniformization is by the aﬃne space of quadratic diﬀerentials (of the complex conjugate
curve), not by the tangent space to M
g,r. On the other hand, (even in the complex
case) one cannot have a holomorphic local canonical uniformization by the aﬃne space of
quadratic diﬀerentials, as one can see easily by considering a one-pointed curve of genus
one with an automorphism of degree three. Thus, to obtain a uniformization by quadratic
diﬀerentials, we need more “rigidifying” information. In our case, the information will take
the form of a topological marking of the curve.
Topological Markings and Uniformization by Quadratic Diﬀerentials
We maintain the notation of the previous subsection. Let us consider the canonical
Frobenius lifting Φ
N : N
ord
g,r → N
ord
g,r
of Theorem 2.8. Just as in Deﬁnition 1.2, Φ N deﬁnes
canonical ´etale local systems on N
ord
g,r in free Zp-modules of rank 3g − 3+ r:
Deﬁnition 3.9. We shall refer to Θ et
N as the tangential local system on N
ord
g,r .W e s h a l l
call its dual, Ωet
N ,t h ediﬀerential local system onN
ord
g,r .
116

Note that if one tensors overZp with Fp, then these local systems become the local systems
(with the same names) considered in Chapter II, §3, following Proposition 3.4.
Now let us assume that k is algebraically closed.L e tα ∈ N
ord
g,r (A)b ea p-adic quasi-
conformal equivalence class. In this subsection, however, we assume thatα corresponds to
a smooth curve. We would like to consider the fundamental groupoid of N
ord
g,r in the sense
of [SGA 1], Expos´e V, p. 130. Recall that this fundamental groupoid is the category of
ﬁber functors from the category of ﬁnite ´ etale coverings of N
ord
g,r to the category of sets.
Moreover, if x ∈ N
ord
g,r (k), then x deﬁnes a ﬁber functor Fx of this type by simply restrict-
ing ´etale coverings of N
ord
g,r to Spec(k) via pull-back byx.T h u s ,i fx, y ∈ N
ord
g,r (k), then we
shall call a path from x to y a natural transformation from Fx to Fy.
On the other hand, recall from the last subsection of Chapter II, §3, the set Dg,r of
isomorphism classes of totally degenerate r-pointed stable curves of genus g.I fΔ ∈D g,r,
then, by abuse of notation, we shall also write Δ ∈ N
ord
g,r (A) for the totally degenerate
curve over A represented by Δ. Now we make the following important
Deﬁnition 3.10. We shall call a pair μ =( Δ ;ϖ)a (p-adic) topological marking for the
quasiconformal equivalence class α if Δ ∈D g,r and ϖ is a path from α(mod p) ∈ N
ord
g,r (k)
to Δ ∈ N
ord
g,r (k).
Let μ =( Δ ;ϖ) be a topological marking for α. Then let us note that μ deﬁnes
a canonical nondegenerate bilinear form Bμ on Θ α as follows. First note that by the
construction in Proposition 3.6 of Chapter II, §3 (which is carried out there over Fp, but
clearly works just as well over Zp), we have a canonical nondegenerate bilinear form Bet
Δ
on Θet
Δ
. Now the path ϖ deﬁnes an isomorphism Θ ϖ :Θ et
α ∼= Θet
Δ . Thus, if we pull-back
Bet
Δ by means of Θ ϖ, we get a canonical nondegenerate bilinear form Bet
μ on Θet
α
.S i n c e
Θα =( Θet
α ) ⊗Zp A, we thus obtain (by tensoring) a canonical nondegenerate bilinear form
Bμ on Θα.
Now let (B, mB) be a local ring with residue ﬁeldk which isp-adically complete and has
a topologically nilpotent PD-structure on mB.L e tβ ∈ N
ord
g,r (B) be in the quasiconformal
equivalence class α. Recall the canonical isomorphism
(Ψ ∨
αβ )−1 :( Θα)B → Θβ
implicit in Theorem 3.8. This isomorphism allows us to transportBμ to Θβ so as to obtain
a canonical nondegenerate bilinear form Bβ
μ on Θβ. We summarize this as follows:
Proposition 3.11. The choice of a topological markingμ on a quasiconformal equivalence
class α allows one to deﬁne a canonical nondegenerate bilinear form Bβ
μ on Θβ for every
β ∈ N
ord
g,r (B) in the quasiconformal equivalence class α.
117

This ﬁnally allows us to give local uniformizations of Mg,r by means of quadratic diﬀeren-
tials: Namely, we compose the aﬃne uniformization of Theorem 3.8 with the isomorphism
Θ
β ∼= Ωβ given by the nondegenerate bilinear form Bβ
μ:
Theorem 3.12. The choice of a topological marking μ on a quasiconformal equivalence
class α that corresponds to a smooth curve allows one to deﬁne a canonical class κ∨
μ,β ∈
mB · Ωβ, as well as a local uniformization
Vμ,β :Ω aﬀ
β ∼= Mβ
g,r
of Mg,r by the aﬃne space modeled on Ωβ, for every β ∈ N
ord
g,r (B) in the quasiconformal
equivalence classα. Finally, for all β ∈ N
ord
g,r (B) that lie in the quasiconformal equivalence
class α, the correspondenceβ ↦→ κμ,β is a bijection of such β onto mB · Ωβ.
Remark. Thus, we have obtained a canonical uniformization of Mg,r by quadratic diﬀer-
entials for every choice of a topological marking on α. In the complex case, a topological
marking of a Riemann surface is given by ﬁxing the underlying topological manifold, up
to homeomorphisms homotopic to the identity. Thus, the analogy between topological
markings in the p-adic and complex cases lies in the fact that ap-adic topological marking
gives one a canonical basis for Θ
et
β , hence for Θ β, corresponding to a collection of parti-
tion curves (see Introduction, §2) of a Riemann surface. This speciﬁcation of partition
curves determines a topological marking, by gluing together “pants” along the partition
curves. Thus, instead of uniformizing by the aﬃne space modeled on Ω β, we could also
have uniformized by the aﬃne space modeled on a direct product of aﬃne lines, one for
each “partition curve.” Whichever choice of coordinates (i.e., quadratic diﬀerentials or
partition curves) is more useful depends on one’s tastes or the applications one has in
mind.
Canonical Multiplicative Parameters
So far we have only been working with smooth curves. In order to ﬁnd canonical
parameters at singular curves, we need to work with multiplicative parameters (like the
q-parameter in the case of elliptic curves), as opposed to aﬃne parameters, as in Theorems
3.6 and 3.8.
Let α ∈
N
ord
g,r (A)b ea p-adic quasiconformal equivalence class (corresponding to a
curve which is not necessarily smooth). Let us assume, for the rest of this subsection,
that k is algebraically closed.L e t Ω
log
α be the restriction of Ω M
log
g,r
to α,a n dl e tΘα be
the dual A-module to Ω log
α . Then the Frobenius invariant subsections of Θ α form a free
Zp-submodule Θet
α ⊆ Θα of rank 3g − 3+ r. Similarly, we have Ωet
α ⊆ Ωlog
α .L e t(Mg,r)α be
the completion of Mg,r ⊗Zp A at the image of α.L e tω ∈ Ωet
α have residues equal to zero
118

or one at all the irreducible components of the divisor at inﬁnity of Mg,r, and nonzero
reduction modulo p. Then, just as in Deﬁnition 1.11, we have a parameter
qω,α
on ( Mg,r)α, which is well-deﬁned up to multiplication by a Teichm¨ uller representative
[k×]. This parameter is a unit at all the divisors where the residue of ω is zero and has
valuation one at all the divisors where the residue of ω is one. Moreover,
Φ−1
N (qω,z )= qp
ω,z
Deﬁnition 3.13. We shall call such a parameterqω,α a canonical multiplicative parameter
on (Mg,r)α.
The Case of Elliptic Curves
Just as in previous Chapters, it is useful to look at the case of elliptic curves (regarded
parabolically) since the calculations are usually much easier in this case. As before, we let
M
log
1,0 be the log stack of elliptic curves, and flog : Glog → M
log
1,0 be the universal elliptic
curve (with the log structure deﬁned by the pull-back to G of the divisor at inﬁnity of
M1,0). Let M
ord
1,0 ⊆ M1,0 be the open p-adic formal substack parametrizing ordinary
elliptic curves. Recall that we computed in Chapter II, Theorem 3.11, that N
ord
1,0 = M
ord
1,0 ,
and that the section ofS1,0 over (M
ord
1,0 )Fp corresponding to the unique nilpotent, ordinary
indigenous bundle on an elliptic curve was given explicitly in Example 2 of Chapter I,
§2. Now it is easy to see that, although nominally everything in this Chapter was done
for hyperbolic curves, much of the theory goes through for elliptic curves, as well. In
particular, the construction of the canonical Frobenius lifting Φ N on M
ord
1,0 goes through
just as before. Since everything else in the Chapter is essentially a formal consequence of
the existence of Φ
N , in this subsection, we would like to compute the lifting ΦN explicitly
for elliptic curves, and identify the resulting concepts (i.e., canonical curves, uniformization,
topological marking, etc.) with the well-known objects of classical Serre-Tate theory. For
a treatment of classical Serre-Tate theory, we refer to [Mess] and [KM] (p. 260).
Let us begin by recalling a certain Frobenius lifting Φ
M on M
ord
1,0 which is fundamental
to Serre-Tate theory. Ultimately, we shall show that Φ M =Φ N . First recall that the
´etale quotient of the (log) p-divisible group P associated to the universal elliptic curve
Gord → M
ord
1,0 deﬁnes a local system L on M
ord
1,0 in free Zp-modules of rank one. Also, since
P is self-dual, taking Cartier duals gives us an inclusion L∨(1) ⊗ (Qp/Zp) ↪→P (where
the “1” in parentheses denotes a Tate twist). Let PΦ ⊆P be the subgroup scheme given
by L∨(1) ⊗ (1
pZp/Zp). Thus, taking the quotient by this subgroup scheme PΦ gives us an
isogeny:
119

ΦG : Gord →H
to some elliptic curve H over M
ord
1,0 .L e tΦ M : M
ord
1,0 → M
ord
1,0 be the classifying morphism
of H.T h u s ,H =Φ ∗
MGord. Since considered modulo p, the subgroup scheme PΦ is nothing
but the kernel of Frobenius, it follows that ΦM is a Frobenius lifting, and that (ΦG)Fp is
just the relative Frobenius on Gord
Fp . For convenience, we shall denote objects pulled back
via ΦM with a superscript “ F.”
Now let us consider the eﬀect of pulling back the indigenous bundle ( E, ∇ E)F on
(Gord)F ,w h e r e(E, ∇ E) is the indigenous bundle on Gord given in Example 2 of Chapter
I, §2. Let ( F, ∇ F )=Φ ∗
G(E, ∇ E)F . Let us denote by ω the relative dualizing sheaf of
Gord → M
ord
1,0 . Then as a vector bundle,
F =Φ ∗
G(ω)F ⊕O G
Now let Φω
G :Φ ∗
G
(ω)F → ω denote the morphism on diﬀerentials induced by Φ G, divided
by p. Then I claim that Φω
G is an isomorphism. Indeed, since we are dealing with ordinary
elliptic curves, the local group structure near the origin is isomorphic to that of Gm (the
multiplicative group scheme), and the Frobenius lifting ΦG just amounts to the pth power
map on Gm. This proves the claim. Since E = ω ⊕O G,Φ ω
G thus gives us an isomorphism:
E ∼= F
by taking the direct sum of Φ ω
G with the identity on OG. Next, we consider connections.
Recall that ∇ E diﬀers from the trivial connection by the tautological Ad( E)-valued dif-
ferential form given by mapping the ﬁrst factor ω to the second factor OG ⊗ ω.T h u s ,
when we pull-back by Φ G, we get a similar nilpotent endomorphism-valued diﬀerential
form, this time given by the map from Φ ∗
G(ω)F (the ﬁrst factor) to OG ⊗ ω (the second
factor) given by p · Φω
G. On the other hand, when we compute the renormalized Frobenius
pull-back of (E, ∇ E), we divide out by this factor ofp. It thus follows that under the isomor-
phism E ∼= F considered above, the renormalized Frobenius pull-back gives a connection
on F which corresponds precisely to the connection ∇ E on E.S i n c e ΦN and (EN , ∇ EN )
are uniquely characterized by the property that the renormalized Frobenius pull-back of
Φ
∗
N (EN , ∇ EN ) is isomorphic to (EN , ∇ EN ), we thus see that we have proven the following
result.
Theorem 3.14. The canonical Frobenius liftingΦN for elliptic curves (regarded parabol-
ically) is equal to the Frobenius lifting ΦM. Moreover, the canonical indigenous bundle
(EN , ∇ EN ) is the indigenous bundle constructed in Example 2 in Chapter I, §2.
Remark. In other words, what we have constructed here is just a relative version of the
uniformizing MF∇ -object of Deﬁnition 1.3.
120

Now let k be a perfect ﬁeld of characteristic p. Then it is well-known from Serre-Tate
theory that an elliptic curve E → Spec(W(k)) is canonical in the sense of Serre-Tate the-
ory if and only if the point in α ∈ M1,0(W(k)) that it deﬁnes is ﬁxed by Φ M.W e t h u s
obtain that the deﬁnition of a canonical curve given in Deﬁnition 3.1 is consistent with the
deﬁnition arising from Serre-Tate theory. Suppose we ﬁx a trivialization of L⊗2|α.T h e n
Serre-Tate theory gives a local uniformization of M1,0 near this point α by the comple-
tion ˆGm of the multiplicative group at the identity. Relative to this uniformization, Φ M
becomes the pth power map on ˆGm. It thus follows immediately that the canonical aﬃne
parameters that we constructed before (in the general case) correspond to the logarithm
of the Serre-Tate parameter (up to multiplication by a unit of W(k)). Moreover, one sees
easily that the local system Ω
et
M corresponding to the Frobenius lifting ΦM is simply L⊗2.
Thus, a topological marking (in the sense of Deﬁnition 3.10) deﬁnes a trivialization of
L
⊗2|α, and so the Serre-Tate parameter itself is a canonical multiplicative parameter in
the sense of Deﬁnition 3.13. We summarize this as follows:
Theorem 3.15. Canonical liftings for elliptic curves (as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3.1 relative
to ΦN ) are the same as canonical liftings in the sense of Serre-Tate theory. Moreover, the
uniformization of Theorem 3.12 in the case of elliptic curves (regarded parabolically) is the
same as the uniformization of M
ord
1,0 given by Serre-Tate theory.
Remark. It appears that the case discussed here in Theorem 3.15, i.e., the caseg =1 ,r =0 ,
is the only case of the theory of this paper that is essentially a reformulation of a classically
known theory. For instance, already in the case g =1 ,r = 1, despite the fact that
M
1,0 = M1,1 (as stacks), it is not diﬃcult to show thatNord
1,0 and Nord
1,1 are quite diﬀerent.
Indeed, in general, there exist connected components of Nord
1,1 that are of degree > 1o v e r
M1,1 (cf. Proposition 3.12 of Chapter II). This implies, in particular, that ΦN in the case
g =1 ,r = 1 is quite diﬀerent from ΦN in the case g =1 ,r =0 .
Finally, we observe that the term “topological marking” is apt in this case in the
sense that a topological marking deﬁnes a trivialization of L|α, which is analogous in the
complex case to specifying a particular pair of generators for the fundamental group of an
elliptic curve.
121

Chapter IV: Canonical Curves
§0. Introduction
Because canonical curves (as deﬁned in Chapter III, Deﬁnition 3.1) admit Frobenius
invariant indigenous bundles, they possess a number of special arithmetic and geometric
properties. In this Chapter, we study a number of these properties, foremost among which
are the existence of a canonical Frobenius lifting, and the construction of a canonical p-
divisible group. In particular, the canonical Frobenius lifting allows us to give a geometric
characterization of canonical curves which may be regarded as the hyperbolic analogue of
the statement in Serre-Tate theory that a lifting of an ordinary elliptic curve is canonical if
and only if it admits a lifting of Frobenius. From the point of view of comparison with the
complex case, this canonical Frobenius lifting may be regarded as a sort of p-adic Green’s
function. In the complex case, the Green’s function plays a central role in the development
of uniformization theory from the classical (as opposed to Bers’ quasiconformal) point of
view. In this context, the Green’s function is essentially the logarithm of the hyperbolic
distance function between two points. We shall see that the Frobenius lifting also gives us
a sort of p-adic notion of distance. Also, we shall see that we can construct “pseudo-Hecke
correspondences” which in some sense geometrically codify this notion of distance.
On the other hand, in the canonical case, we can also construct a certain Galois rep-
resentation (arising from the torsion points of the canonical logp-divisible group) which is
the p-adic analogue of the canonical representation in the complex case of the fundamental
group into PSL
2(R) (deﬁned by the covering transformations of the upper half plane).
Thus, in some sense, we see that at least in the canonical case, we are able to obtain ana-
logues of most of the fundamental objects that appear in classical complex uniformization
theory.
This brings us to the ﬁnal reason for wanting to study the canonical case: namely,
the fact that the universal hyperbolically ordinary curve (over the moduli stack) is itself
(essentially) a canonical curve. Thus, in Chapter V, by restricting these canonical objects
over the universal curve to a given (not necessarily canonical) curve, we will be able to
obtain Green’s functions, canonical Galois representations, and so on for noncanonical
curves, as well.
§1. The Canonical Galois Representation
In this Section, we construct a certain canonical Galois representation of the arith-
metic fundamental group of a canonical curve. After studying some of the basic global
properties of such representations, we then consider what happens on the ordinary locus
of the curve. In particular, we construct a canonical ordinary Frobenius lifting over the
ordinary locus. This allows us to apply the general theory of Chapter III, §1. We will
122

refer to the multiplicative parameters obtained from this general theory as theSerre-Tate
parameters. We will make use of the Serre-Tate parameter quite often in this Chapter.
Throughout this Section, we will work over A = W(k), where k is a perfect ﬁeld of
odd characteristic. The quotient ﬁeld of A will be denoted by K.L e tg,r be nonnegative
integers such that 2 g − 2+ r ≥ 1. Also, we will deal with a ﬁxed α ∈ N
ord
g,r (A), which
corresponds to asmooth canonical curve flog : Xlog → Slog,w h e r eSlog is Spec(A)w i t ht h e
trivial log structure. Since singular canonical curves are just obtained by gluing together
smooth canonical curves, we shall concentrate mainly on the smooth case.
Construction and Global Properties
Let (E, ∇ E) be the canonical indigenous bundle on Xlog (whose existence is stated in
Chapter III, Theorem 2.8). In fact, unless the number r of marked points is even, such
a vector bundle will not exist. However, one can always pass to an ´ etale double cover
of X on which it will exist, and then descend. For simplicity, we will just act as though
this problem does not exist, except when we state ﬁnal results in Theorems, in which
case our representations will be into GL ± (that is, the general linear group GL modulo
the subgroup {±1}). Now, we would also like to say that the renormalized Frobenius
pull-back F∗(E, ∇ E)F is isomorphic to ( E, ∇ E). In general, this may only be true up to
tensoring with a line bundle with connection whose square is trivial, but this may also be
ignored, provided we remember that ultimately our representations will be into GL
±,n o t
GL. Let us choose an isomorphism Φ E :( E, ∇ E) ∼= F∗(E, ∇ E)F which is the identity on
determinants. We shall call ΦE the canonical Frobenius action on(E, ∇ E).
Now let us assume that there exists a rational point x : S → X on X which avoids
the marked points. Let us denote by Π the proﬁnite group π1(Xlog
K ,xK). Then Theorem
2.6 of [Falt] implies that
Theorem 1.1. There exists a unique dual crystalline (in the sense of [Falt], §2) repre-
sentation
ρ:Π → GL±(V )
(where V is a free Zp-module of rank two) that corresponds (under the functor D(−) of
[Falt], §2)t o (E, ∇ E,ΦE). Moreover, the determinant representation ofρ is the cyclotomic
character. We shall refer to ρ as the canonical crystalline representation associated to
Xlog.
Remark. In the complex case, a hyperbolic Riemann surface can be uniformized by the
upper half plane. Then the fundamental group of the Riemann surface acts on the upper
half plane via covering transformations, and so we get a representation of the fundamental
123

group into PSL2(R), which is canonically determined up to conjugation. The representa-
tion ρ of Theorem 1.1 is the p-adic analogue of this complex representation.
Now let Δ = π1(XK,xK) be the geometric subgroup of Π, so Γ
def
=Π /Δ is the Galois
group of K over K. Then by “the comparison theorem” (Theorem 5.3 of [Falt]), we get:
Theorem 1.2. Let p ≥ 5. Then the group cohomology modules Hi(Δ ,Ad(V )(1)) (where
the “ (1)” is a Tate twist) are zero, except when i =1 .L e t U = H1(Δ ,Ad(V )(1)).T h e n
U is a crystalline Zp-Γ-module, which, as a Zp-module is free of rank 6(g − 1) + 2r.I t
corresponds under the functorD(−) to an MF-object (in the sense of Fontaine-Laﬀaille)
(N;Fi(N);φi) over A,w h e r eN is a free A-module of rank 6(g − 1) + 2r; Fi(N)=0 if
i ≥ 4; Fi(N)= N if i ≤ 0; Fi(N) is naturally isomorphic to H0(X, (ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D)),i f
i =1 ,2,3;a n dN/F1(N) is naturally isomorphic to H1(X,τXlog/Slog ).
Remark. Some mathematicians have raised questions concerning that the validity of the
proof in [Falt], Theorem 5.3. However, in this one-dimensional case, one can give ad hoc
proofs of this result, and, moreover, (at least in the closed case, when r = 0) T. Tsuji has
orally informed the author that he has obtained a diﬀerent proof of Theorem 5.3 of [Falt].
One interesting fact about the canonical representation ρ is that it is possible to
characterize it – as well as the canonicality of Xlog – solely in terms of the properties of ρ
as a Galois representation:
Theorem 1.3. Suppose thatp ≥ 5.L e tXlog → Spec(A) be any (not necessarily canonical)
r-pointed smooth curve of genusg over A. Assume that we are not in the cases(g =0 ; r =
3) or (g =1 ; r =1 ).L e t τ :Π → GL±(W) be any dual crystalline representation of
Π= π1(Xlog
K ,xK) on a free Zp-module W of rank two such that
(1) Hi
P (Δ ,Ad(W)(1)) = 0 if i ̸=1 ; H1(Δ ,Ad(W)(1)) is crystalline, and
corresponds to an MF-object M =( M;Fi(M);ψi) such that Fi(M)=
0 if i ≥ 4; Fi(M)= M if i ≤ 0;a n dFi(M) is a free A-module of rank
3(g − 1) +r if i =1 ,2,3;
(2) the Frobenius endomorphism of(M/F 1(M))Fp (arising from the MF-
object of (1)) is an isomorphism;
(3) det(τ) is the cyclotomic character.
Then Xlog is canonical, and τ is isomorphic to the representation ρ of Theorem 1.1.
Proof. Since τis asserted to be dual crystalline, it corresponds to some vector bundle with
connection (G, ∇ G)o n Xlog, together with a ﬁltration Fi(G)o n G.L e t i1 (respectively,
i2) be the largest i such that Fi(G) ̸= 0 (respectively, Fi(G)= G). Thus, i1 ≥ i2.T h e
124

condition that det(τ) be cyclotomic implies that i1 + i2 = 1. If the rank of Fi1 (G)i sn o t
one, then i1 = i2, and det(τ) could not be cyclotomic, so Fi1 (G) must be of rank one, and
i1 >i 2.L e t L = Fi1 (G). Thus, L is a line bundle.
Let j1 be the largest j such that Fj(M) ̸= 0. Now we claim that L can not be stable
under ∇ G. Indeed, if it were, then the monodromy at the marked points of ∇ G on L,
being nilpotent and one-dimensional, must be zero. Thus, the induced connection on L
has no poles at the marked points. But this would imply that deg( L) = 0. Hence the
rank over A of Fj1 (M)w o u l db e≤ h0(X, L⊗2 ⊗ ωX/S) ≤ g< 3g − 3+ r (by Cliﬀord’s
Theorem), which contradicts our hypotheses. This proves the claim. On the other hand,
by Griﬃths transversality, if i
1 − i2 ≥ 2, then Fi1 (G) would have to be stable under ∇ G.
Thus, i1 = i2 +1 ,s o i1 + i2 = 1 implies that i1 = 1 and i2 =0 .
Now rankA(F3(M)) = 3g − 3+ r ≤ h0(X, L⊗2 ⊗ ωX/S), so the line bundle L⊗2 ⊗ ωX/S
must be nonspecial, by Cliﬀord’s Theorem. It thus follows that deg(L⊗2) ≥ 2g−2+r.S i n c e
the Kodaira-Spencer morphism for the ﬁltration is nonzero, we cannot have deg( L⊗2) >
2g − 2+ r. Thus, we see that (G, ∇ G)m u s tb eindigenous. Since it is also carried to itself
by the renormalized Frobenius, it follows from Chapter III, Corollary 3.4, that Xlog is
canonical, and that (G, ∇ G) must be the canonical indigenous bundle of Theorem 1.1. ⃝
Remark. For the reader who is interested in handling the cases g =0 ; r = 3 and g =1 ;
r = 1, as well, we remark that by considering conditions (similar to those imposed on
Hi(Δ ,Ad(W)(1))) on higher symmetric powers of W, one can characterize the canonical
representations in these cases as well solely in terms of their properties as Galois represen-
tations.
Remark. Really, the substantive missing element here is that it is not clear to the author
how to characterize the property of being “dual crystalline” solely in terms of proper-
ties of the representation relative to the triple (Π; Δ ⊆ Π; Π/Δ ∼= Gal(K/K)). Thus,
ultimately, a knowledge of the curve Xlog is always present in the background of this
“Galois representation-theoretic” characterization of the canonical representation. For in-
stance, if the property of being “dual crystalline” were known to depend only on the triple
(Π; Δ ⊆ Π; Π/Δ ∼= Gal(
K/K)), then one could obtain the result that whether or not a
curve is canonical depends only on that triple.
In the following, we return to the assumption that Xlog is canonical.
The Horizontal Section over the Ordinary Locus
We maintain the notation of the previous subsection. Let Xord be the p-adic formal
scheme which is the open sub-formal scheme of X given by the complement of the super-
singular divisor (Chapter II, Proposition 2.6). Let us endow Xord with the log structure
induced by Xlog, and call the resulting log formal scheme ( Xlog)ord. We shall refer to
125

(Xlog)ord as the ordinary locus of Xlog. The purpose of this subsection is to prove and
interpret the following result:
Theorem 1.4. There exists a unique subbundleT
1
2 ⊆E | Xord of rank one with the following
properties:
(1) T
1
2 is horizontal, and moreover, for any n, the reduced line bundle
T
1
2
Z/pnZ has a nonempty subsheaf (in the category of sets) consisting of
horizontal sections that generate T
1
2
Z/pnZ as an OXord -module;
(2) T
1
2 is taken to itself by ΦE.
Finally, (T
1
2 )⊗2 is naturally isomorphic to τXlog/Slog |Xord .
Proof. Let us prove that there exists a unique Φ E-invariant horizontal subbundle T
1
2 ⊆
E|Xord with horizontal generating sections. We prove this by induction onn,w h e r et h enth
step is the construction of such a T
1
2 modulo pn.F o rn = 1, recall that (up to tensoring
with a line bundle) EFp is an FL-bundle (Chapter II, Proposition 2.5). Then under the
correspondence of that Proposition, we take our subbundle T
1
2
Fp to be the subbundle of
E corresponding to the subbundle that we called “ T ” in our discussion of FL-bundles in
Chapter II, §1. This subbundle is clearly horizontal, and has local generating sections
that are horizontal. In this case, uniqueness follows from the fact that the p-curvature is
nonzero.
Now we assume thatn ≥ 2, and that the result is known forn−1. Let Ulog =( Xlog)ord,
and let Φ log : Ulog → (Ulog)F be a Frobenius lifting. Let us consider the quotient Q
(respectively, P)o f EZ/pn Z by pn−1 · F1(E) (respectively, pn−1 ·E ). Thus, P is a quotient
of Q,a n d P = EZ/pn−1Z.L e t T ′′ ⊆P be the subbundle given us by the induction
hypothesis. Let T ′ ⊆Q be the the inverse image of T ′′ ⊆P via the surjection Q→P .
Then Φ ∗(T ′)F ⊆ Φ∗QF deﬁnes a subbundle T
1
2
Z/pn Z of F∗(E)F
Z/pn Z. It follows from the
deﬁnition of T
1
2
Fp and the fact that we are on the ordinary locus that T
1
2
Z/pnZ is ﬂat over
Z/pnZ. The existence of local horizontal generating sections for T
1
2
Z/pnZ follows by taking
such a section of T ′′, lifting it to T ′, and then pulling back this lifted section of T ′ to a
section of T
1
2
Z/pnZ via Φ ∗. That the connection vanishes on this section follows from the
deﬁnitions, plus the fact that pulling back by Φ adds an extra factor of p.S i n c eT ′′ is ΦE-
invariant, it follows that T
1
2
Z/pnZ ⊗ Z/pn−1Z = T ′′. Thus, by the construction of T
1
2
Z/pn Z,
it is clear that T
1
2
Z/pnZ is Φ E-invariant, since pulling back any lifting of T ′′ by Φ E will
give T
1
2
Z/pnZ. Also, this same observation (coupled with the induction hypothesis) proves
uniqueness. This completes the proof of the induction step. The last statement about
(T
1
2 )⊗2 follows from considering the splitting of the Hodge ﬁltration that T
1
2 deﬁnes. ⃝
126

Now suppose that our basepoint x : S → X maps into the ordinary locus Xord.L e t
Πord = π1((Xlog)ord
K ,xK). Thus, we have a natural morphism:
Πord → Π
Let us denote the restriction of ρ to Πord via this natural morphism by
ρord :Π ord → GL±(V ord)
Then if we apply the theory of [Falt],§2 to interpret Theorem 1.4, we see that the subbundle
T
1
2 ⊆E | Xord in fact deﬁnes a sub- MF ∇ -object corresponding to an ´etale representation
(ρord)et :Π ord → GL±(Vet)o fΠ ord, for some rank one freeZp-quotient moduleV ord → Vet.
Here, by “´etale,” we mean that the kernel of (ρord)et deﬁnes an ´etale covering of Xord.I n
other words, we have an exact sequence of (“up to {±1}”) representations of Πord:
0 → V ∨
et (1) → V ord → Vet → 0
where the “1” in parentheses is a Tate twist. We state this as a Corollary:
Corollary 1.5. The restriction ρord of ρ to Πord deﬁnes an (“up to {±1}”) moduleV ord
of Πord, which ﬁts into an exact sequence:
0 → V ∨
et (1) → V ord → Vet → 0
where Vet is ´etale and of rank one over Zp.
The Canonical Frobenius Lifting over the Ordinary Locus
In this subsection, we construct the generalized analogue (for an arbitrary canonical
Xlog)o ft h ep-adic endomorphism of the ordinary locus of the moduli stack of elliptic curves
obtained by sending an elliptic curve with ordinary reduction to its quotient modulo its
unique subgroup scheme which is ´etale locally isomorphic to μp. In many respects, the
construction is similar to (although not literally a logical consequence of) the construction
of the Frobenius lifting on N
ord
g,r constructed in Chapter III, §2.
Consider the canonical indigenous bundle (E, ∇ E) (of Theorem 1.1) on the canonical
curve Xlog → Slog. By Chapter II, Proposition 2.5, (E, ∇ E)Fp corresponds to an FL-bundle
0 →T Fp →F →O XFp → 0
127

on Xlog
Fp . By the material directly preceding Chapter II, Proposition 1.2, splittings of this
exact sequence correspond to Frobenius liftings on Xlog
Z/p2 Z.N o w ,over the ordinary locus
of Xlog, the Hodge ﬁltration deﬁnes such a splitting. Let us denote the resulting Frobenius
lifting on the ordinary locus by
Φ2 :( Xlog)ord
Z/p2 Z → ((Xlog)ord)F
Z/p2 Z
Let us denote by ˜E the vector bundle which is the inductive limit of the following diagram:
F1(E) −→ E
⏐⏐↓p·
F1(E)
where the horizontal arrow is the natural inclusion. Note that ˜EZ/pn Z depends only on
EZ/pn Z. By the deﬁnition of the renormalized Frobenius pull-back, Φ ∗
2 ˜EF
Z/p2 Z is naturally
isomorphic to EZ/p2 Z. We shall identify these two sheaves in the following discussion. On
the other hand, by considering the object in the upper right-hand corner of the diagram
deﬁning ˜E, we obtain a morphism
Φ∗
2EF
Z/p2 Z →E Z/p2 Z
whose restriction to Φ∗
2F1(E)F
Z/p2 Z vanishes on p · Φ∗
2F1(E)F
Z/p2 Z and maps Φ∗
2F1(E)F
Z/p2 Z
into p ·F1(E)Z/p2 Z (by the deﬁnition of the correspondence between Frobenius liftings and
splittings of the FL-bundle F).
Now let Ψ3 :( Xlog)ord
Z/p3 Z → ((Xlog)ord)F
Z/p3 Z be any lifting of Φ2. Then, again from
the deﬁnition of the renormalized Frobenius pull-back, we obtain a morphism
Ψ ∗
3EF
Z/p3 Z →E Z/p3 Z
which vanishes on p2 · Ψ ∗
3F1(E)F
Z/p3 Z. However, if Ψ3 is an arbitrary lifting of Φ2,t h e nw e
don’t know that Ψ∗
3F1(E)F
Z/p3 Z is mapped into F1(E)Z/p3 Z.
Now suppose that we modify Ψ 3 by a section δ ∈ Γ(Xord, TFp ). Let HT : TFp →
(τXlog/Slog )Fp |Xord be the isomorphism deﬁned by projecting to the Hodge ﬁltration. Then
the subsheaf of EZ/p3 Z given by the image of F1(E)F
Z/p3 Z under Ψ3 + δ diﬀers from the
corresponding image subsheaf under Ψ 3 by the amount HT (δ) ∈ Γ(Xord,(τXlog/Slog )Fp ).
Indeed, this follows from the deﬁnitions, plus the fact that the Kodaira-Spencer morphism
for E is the identity. SinceH
T is an isomorphism, it thus follows that there exists a unique
Frobenius lifting
128

Φ3 :( Xlog)ord
Z/p3 Z → ((Xlog)ord)F
Z/p3 Z
that lifts Φ2 such that Φ∗
3 maps F1(E)F
Z/p3 Z into F1(E).
Clearly, we may repeat this procedure modulo pn for arbitrary n ≥ 3, so as to obtain
a unique
Φlog
X :( Xlog)ord → ((Xlog)ord)F
such that under the natural morphism
Φ∗
X EF →E
the Hodge ﬁltration is preserved. Note, moreover, that it follows from the fact that the
Kodaira-Spencer morphism at the Hodge section is an isomorphism plus the interpretation
of the FL-bundleF in terms of Frobenius liftings that this Frobenius lifting Φ
log
X is ordinary
in the sense of Chapter III, Deﬁnition 1.1. In summary, we have proven the following result:
Theorem 1.6. Let Xlog be a canonical curve;(E, ∇ E) the canonical indigenous bundle on
Xlog. Then there exists a unique ordinary Frobenius lifting (called canonical)
Φlog
X :( Xlog)ord → ((Xlog)ord)F
over the ordinary locus that preserves the Hodge ﬁltration.
In particular, we can apply the theory of Chapter III, §1, to the Frobenius lift-
ing Φlog
X . Note that it follows immediately from the deﬁnitions that the MF∇ -object
(E,F 1(E), ∇ E,ΦE)|(Xlog)ord is precisely the uniformizing MF∇ -object associated to Φ log
X
(as in Chapter III, Deﬁnition 1.3). Let us write
T =( T
1
2 )⊗2
Thus, ∇ E (respectively, ΦE) induces a natural connection (respectively, Frobenius action)
on T , which deﬁnes the canonical tangential local system of Chapter III, Deﬁnition 1.2.
Since T is a line bundle, it is the same to give (over an ´etale covering ofXord) a generating
Frobenius invariant section of it, or a generating Frobenius invariant section of its dual.
Thus, (just as in Chapter III, Deﬁnition 1.11) if θis such a section of T ,t h e nθdeﬁnes, at
every z ∈ X
ord(A) that avoids the marked points, a unique multiplicative parameter
qθ ∈ R×
z
129

(where Rz is the completion of Xord at z). If the residue of θis equal to one at a marked
point z ∈ Xord(A), then we get a multiplicative parameter
q ∈ Rz
(with valuation one at the divisor Im( z)) which is unique up to multiplication by a Te-
ichm¨uller representative [k×].
Deﬁnition 1.7. We shall call q (respectively, qθ)t h eSerre-Tate parameter (respectively,
relative to θ)a t z.
Note, in particular, that by the theory of Chapter III,§1, Φ−1
X maps q (respectively, qθ)t o
qp (respectively, qp
θ).
Remark. In some sense, it would be more aesthetically pleasing if one could obtain the
Frobenius lifting of Theorem 1.6 in the following way. We consider the universal curve
C→ N
ord
g,r .T h e nC parametrizes (r + 1)-pointed stable curves of genus g,s ow eh a v ea
Frobenius lifting on some stack which is ´etale over C. If we could prove that this Frobenius
lifting is compatible with the canonical Frobenius lifting on N
ord
g,r , then we could obtain a
canonical Frobenius lifting on C (or at least some stack ´etale over C) simply by using the
canonical Frobenius on N
ord
g,r+1.
The problem with this approach is that despite the fact that the canonical modular
Frobenius liftings of Chapter III do have many interesting functorial relations (i.e., rela-
tive to restriction to the boundary and log admissible coverings), in general, the sort of
compatibility of Frobenius liftings necessary to make the above sketch of a proof work –
namely, compatibility with “forgetting a marked point” – simply does not hold. Indeed,
one can already see this in the case of the morphism
M1,1 → M1,0
which is the identity on the underlying stacks, but which we think of as assigning to a one-
pointed curve of genus one the underlying elliptic curve. Here, the canonical Frobenius on
N
ord
1,1 cannot be compatible with the canonical Frobenius onN
ord
1,0 for the following reason.
Since N
ord
1,0 ↪→ M1,0 is an open immersion, it would follow that the canonical Frobenius
on N
ord
1,1 would descend to an open formal subscheme of M1,1. But this would mean that
even if a one-pointed curve of genus one in characteristic p belongs to several distinct
quasiconformal equivalence classes (a phenomenon which by Chapter II, Proposition 3.13,
does occur), the canonical liftings of that curve would be the same for all quasiconformal
equivalence classes. But this would mean that we have several diﬀerent ordinary indigenous
bundles on a single hyperbolic curve, all of which are Frobenius invariant. By Chapter III,
Lemma 2.6, this is absurd.
130

§2. The Canonical Log p-divisible Group
Although the existence of the canonical Galois representation of§1 is, in and of itself,
of some interest, one technical drawback that it has is that it is diﬃcult to relate the
properties of the Galois representation or the characteristic zero coverings of X
log
Qp that it
determines to Xlog
Z/pn Z. Thus, in this Section, we shall construct a log p-divisible group
on Xlog which gives us back the canonical Galois representation (by looking at the Galois
action on torsion points), but which has the advantage that one can study and understand
its reductions modulo p
n in a similar fashion to the elliptic modular case (which is studied
in [KM]).
Log p-divisible Groups at Inﬁnity
We maintain the notation of the previous Section (althoughk need not be algebraically
closed, just perfect). For basic facts about log schemes, we refer to [Kato] and [Kato2].
In [Kato2], certain ﬁnite, log ﬂat group objects over the compactiﬁed moduli stack of
elliptic curves are introduced which are supposed to be the analogue at inﬁnity of the
usual ﬁnite, ﬂat group schemes that one gets from elliptic curves by considering the kernel
of multiplication by a power ofp. Since we will use such objects (as well as the p-divisible
group objects obtained by taking direct limits thereof) later in this Section, we take the
time out in the present subsection to review explicitly the construction of these ﬁnite, log
ﬂat group objects.
Let R = A[[q]] be a complete local ring which is formally smooth of dimension one
over A.I f o n einverts q, then by taking the (p
n)th root of q, one obtains an extension of
ﬁnite ﬂat group schemes
0 → Z/pnZ(1) → Gn → Z/pnZ → 0
over R[1/q]. Because q is not a unit in R, it is impossible to extend this extension of ﬁnite
ﬂat group schemes overR[1/q] to an extension of ﬁnite ﬂat group schemes overR. Our goal
in this subsection, however, is to exhibit a natural extension of the above exact sequence
to an exact sequence deﬁned over R by working with group objects in the category of
ﬁnite, log ﬂat log schemes over Spec( R)
log. (In this subsection, we will regard Spec(R)a s
endowed with the log structure arising from the divisor deﬁned by q.)
For nonnegative integers a, b,l e tMa,b be the monoid given by taking the quotient of
N2 (where N is the monoid of nonnegative integers) by the equivalence relation generated
by (pa,0) ∼ (0,b). Let e1 ∈ Ma,b (respectively, e2 ∈ Ma,b) be the image of (1,0) (respec-
tively, (0,1)) in Ma,b. Then it follows from the theory of [Kato2] (especially,§4.1, 5.1) that
we can construct the desired extension
0 → Z/pnZ(1) → G
log
n → Z/pnZ → 0
131

as follows: For j ∈{ 0, ... ,pn − 1}, consider the scheme G′
n,j given by R[x]/(xpn
− qj),
with the log structure given by the chart ([Kato], §2) Mn,j with e1 ↦→ x; e2 ↦→ q. Denote
the resulting log scheme by (G′)log
n,j.L e tGlog
n,j be the universal valuative log space ([Kato2],
§1.3.1) (which, in this case, will still be a log scheme) associated to ( G′)log
n,j.L e t G
log
n be
the union of the Glog
n,j. Note that when we invert q, G
log
n becomes Gn. Endow G
log
n with
the unique structure of group object that extends the group structure on Gn.T h e nG
log
n
is a group object in the category of ﬁnite, log ﬂat log schemes over Spec( R)log, and it ﬁts
into an exact sequence as above.
As we allown to vary, we get morphismsG
log
n → G
log
n+1
. Thus, we obtain an ind-group
object G over Spec(R)log.
Deﬁnition 2.1. We shall refer to G as the log p-divisible group over Spec(R)log obtained
by taking pth power roots of q ∈ R.
Finally, we remark that, although what we are doing here is, in some sense, just
“trivial general nonsense,” its utility lies in the fact that by using it, we can obtainp-adic
ﬁnite coverings of Xlog that are deﬁned over all of Xlog, thus allowing us to algebrize.
Construction of the Canonical Log p-divisible Group
We now turn to the construction of the canonical logp-divisible group on Xlog. Con-
sider the MF∇ -object (E, ∇ E,ΦE), deﬁned by the canonical indigenous bundle. Let n ≥ 1.
Let U ⊆ X be the open p-adic subscheme deﬁned by removing the marked points. Then
the reduction modulo pn of ( E, ∇ E,ΦE)|U deﬁnes, by [Falt], Theorem 7.1, a ﬁnite, ﬂat
group scheme (annihilated by pn), which we denote byGn|U → U. On the other hand, let
R be the complete local ring at any one of the marked points. Then (E, ∇ E,ΦE) deﬁnes a
Serre-Tate parameter (as in Deﬁnition 1.7) q ∈ R/[k×]. Let ˜q ∈ R be any representative
of q.T h e nR = A[[˜q]]. Let Glog
n |R be the log scheme constructed in the previous sub-
section by taking a (pn)th-root of q. Observe that diﬀerent choices of ˜q give us naturally
isomorphic Glog
n |R’s. Also, note that if we invert ˜q,t h e nGlog
n |R becomes (Gn|U )|R.T h u s ,
we see that Gn|U and the various Glog
n |R at the marked points glue together naturally to
form a ﬁnite, log ﬂat group object Glog
n → Xlog,w h i c ha priori is just p-adic, but may be
algebrized since X is proper over A. Also, as n varies, we obtain natural morphisms
... → Glog
n → Glog
n+1 → ...
which thus form an inductive system of group objects.
Deﬁnition 2.2. We shall call this inductive system of group objects the canonical log
p-divisible group on Xlog.
132

Remark. As usual, strictly speaking we really have only deﬁned a “group up to {±1}.”
That is, we really only have a group object over (perhaps) a ﬁnite ´ etale covering of X
of degree 4, plus descent data (satisfying the cocycle condition up to {±1})d o w nt ot h e
original X. We could, of course, develop the general nonsense of such “groups up to{±1},”
but we choose not to, since it seems to serve no real purpose.
If we invert p, then this log p-divisible group Glog on Xlog deﬁnes a local system on
the ´etale site (Xlog
Qp )et in free Zp-modules of rank two. Thus, we get a Galois representation
on the Tate module T of characteristic zero torsion points of Glog:
ρGlog :Π → GL±(T)
Then we have the following result (which is immediate from the theory of [Falt], especially
the construction in the proof of Theorem 7.1):
Proposition 2.3. The representation ρGlog is isomorphic to the canonical Galois repre-
sentation ρ of Theorem 1.1.
Review of the Theory of [Katz-Mazur]
In this subsection, we apply to the log p-divisible group Glog the theory of [KM],
which is exposed in [KM] solely in the case of the canonical logp-divisible on the compact-
iﬁed moduli stack of elliptic curves, but whose proofs go through without change for the
canonical log p-divisible group G
log on any canonical curve Xlog.
First of all, because Glog is a logarithmic p-divisible group, it follows from [Mess],
Chapter II, Theorem 3.3.13, that if we consider the formal neighborhood of the identity
section ϵ : X → G, we obtain a formally smooth formal schemeˆG(ϵ)o v e rX, which is easily
seen to have relative dimension 1 over X. We would like to use this observation to apply
the theory of [KM], Chapter 1, on “A-generators” and “A-structures” toGlog.T h et h e o r y
there goes through just as in the modular case since the only technical assumption needed
on the ﬁnite, ﬂat (logarithmic) group schemes whose A-generators we wish to parametrize
is that they be closed subschemes of some smooth one-dimensional scheme. However,
looking at the proofs of [KM], one sees that in fact, it suﬃces to have the ﬁnite, ﬂat (log)
group schemes be closed subschemes of a formally smooth formal scheme (such as ˆG(ϵ))
of relative dimension one. Thus, we can deﬁne various moduli problems, just as in [KM],
Chapter 3, by means of various structures:
(1) a Γ(n)-structure, which consists of giving a Drinfeld basis for G
log
n ;
(2) a Γ1(n)-structure, which consists of giving a point “of exact order pn”
in Glog
n ;
133

(3) a Γ 0(n)-structure, which consists of giving an isogeny Glog → Hlog
(where Hlog is also a log p-divisible group) whose kernel is cyclic of
order pn.
Moreover, just as in [KM], one proves that these various moduli problems are representable
by schemes X(n); X1(n); X0(n) that are ﬁnite over X. Finally, all of these schemesX(n);
X1(n); and X0(n)a r e ,i nf a c t ,regular. Indeed, away from the marked points, the proofs
of regularity in [KM], Chapters 5 and 6, boil down to general nonsense plus two technical
results (Proposition 5.3.4 and Theorem 6.1.1). Since these technical results are proven,
respectively, for arbitrary formal groups and arbitrary ﬁnite group schemes, it is immediate
that the regularity proofs of [KM] in the modular case go through without change forX(n);
X
1(n); and X0(n). At the marked points, the combinatorial descriptions of the situation at
the cusps in [KM], Chapter 10, go through without change for the above moduli problems.
We thus obtain the following Theorem:
Theorem 2.4. The schemes X(n); X
1(n);a n dX0(n) that represent the moduli problems
listed above are all regular, and hence equal to the normalizations ofX in the ﬁnite cover-
ings of XK deﬁned by the appropriate composites of ρ:Π → GL±(V ) with ﬁnite quotients
GL±(V ) → G, just as in the classical modular case.
Fix a positive integer n. We shall also need to analyze X0(n) modulo p,i naf a s h i o n
similar to what is done in the modular case in [KM], Chapter 13. Let us (for the rest of
the Section) denote X0(n)b y Y , and let us use a subscript m on X, Y , etc., to denote
reduction modulo pm+1. Let us denote by ΦA : A → A,Φ k : k → k the respective absolute
Frobenius morphisms, and by a superscriptFm the result of base-changing an object by the
mth power of Frobenius, and by ΦX0 : X0 → XF
0 the relative Frobenius ofX0. Essentially,
the description of Y0 = Y ⊗Zp Fp given in [KM], Chapter 13, goes through in our situation
here, but we need to do things with a little bit more care, since [KM] often falls back on
the “crutch” of using the modular interpretation of their “X,” which we lack in this more
general situation.
For each ordered pair of nonnegative integers ( a, b) such that a + b = n,w ew o u l d
like to deﬁne a k-scheme X
0(a, b)o f“ ( a, b)-cyclic isogenies” together with a k-morphism
ι(a,b);0 : X0(a, b) → Y0. We do this as follows. If a, b ≥ 1, then we let X0(a, b)b e
the schematic inverse image of Infp−1(Δ) (the ( p − 1)st inﬁnitesimal neighborhood of the
diagonal) via
Φa−1
X0 × Φb−1
X0 : X0 × XFa−b
0 → XFa−1
0 × XFa−1
0
If a or b is zero, then we let X0(a, b) be the schematic inverse image of the diagonal Δ via
Φa
X0 × Φb
X0 : X0 × XFa−b
0 → XFa
0 × XFa
0
134

Observe that in either case, ( X0(a, b))red is smooth over k;Φ a
X0 × Φb
X0 maps X0(a, b) ⊆
X0 ×XFa−b
0 into Δ ⊆ XFa
0 ×XFa
0 ;a n dX0(a, b) comes equipped with a ﬁnite, ﬂat, radicial
morphism
D0(a, b): X0(a, b) → X0
To deﬁne
ι(a,b);0 : X0(a, b) → Y0
we must specify a cyclic subgroup of order pn of D0(a, b)∗Glog
0 . Now on the one hand,
by composing the ath power of Frobenius with the bth-power of the Verschiebung (as in
[KM], Theorem 13.3.5), we get some subgroup object of order pn of D0(a, b)∗Glog
0 ,a n db y
the same argument as that given in [KM], Theorem 13.3.5, one sees that this subgroup
must be cyclic (in the Drinfeldian sense). Thus, by the modular deﬁnition of Y
0,w eg e ta
morphism ι(a,b);0 : X0(a, b) → Y0.
In order to apply the theory of [KM], Chapter 13, we must verify the conditions (1)
through (8) listed at the beginning of that Chapter. ( Caution: The letters X and Y
in [KM], Chapter 13, are used in the reverse way to the way that they are used here.)
Conditions (1), (2), (4), (5), and (6) are trivial. Condition (3) follows from the regularity
of Y and the fact that over a supersingular point, there is only one A-generator valued in
k for a cyclic group, namely the identity element. Note that at ordinary points, one can
do the same analysis of p
th power isogenies of log p-divisible groups as is done in [KM],
Chapter 13, §3. Thus, Condition (7) (that ι(a,b);0 is a closed immersion) and Condition (8)
(that the ι(a,b);0’s deﬁne an isomorphism of the disjoint union of X0(a, b)’s with Y0 over
the ordinary locus) follow at the level of topological spaces from this analysis, and at the
level of complete local rings by considering the deformation parameters for the domain
and range log p-divisible groups of the isogeny. We thus get a result analogous to [KM],
Theorem 13.4.7:
Theorem 2.5. The k-scheme Y0 is the disjoint union, with crossings at the supersingular
points (in the terminology of [KM], Chapter 13, §1), of the n +1 schemes X0(a, b) (where
a + b = n). Let f(a,b) ∈ k[[x, y]] be the equation
(xpa−1
− ypb−1
)p−1
if a, b ≥ 1,a n dl e ti tb expa
− ypb
if a or b is zero. Then the completed local ring at a
k-rational supersingular point of Y0 is isomorphic to
k[[x, y]]/(
∏
(a,b)
f(a,b))
135

with the closed subscheme X0(a, b) ⊆ Y0 given by the equation f(a,b).
§3. The Compactiﬁed Canonical Frobenius Lifting
In this Section, we study the canonical Frobenius lifting on the ordinary locus of
a canonical curve (deﬁned in Theorem 1.6). In particular, we study its behavior at su-
persingular points, and “compactify it” in some sense, so as to obtain “pseudo-Hecke
correspondences.” It is by abstracting the main properties of this compactiﬁed Frobenius
in the canonical case that we shall obtain a geometric criterion for a curve to be canonical
in §4.
The Canonical Frobenius Lifting and the Canonical Log p-divisible Group
Let us denote by
Φ
log
X :( Xlog)ord → ((Xlog)ord)F
the canonical Frobenius lifting of Theorem 1.6. Let Glog be the canonical log p-divisible
group on Xlog of Deﬁnition 2.2. Then we rephrase Theorem 1.6 in terms ofGlog as follows:
Theorem 3.1. The canonical Frobenius lifting of Theorem 1.6
Φlog
X :( Xlog)ord → ((Xlog)ord)F
induces an isogeny of degreep
Φ∗
X(Glog)F |(Xlog)ord → Glog|(Xlog)ord
between the canonical log p-divisible groups that lifts the Frobenius morphism modulo p.
Moreover, Φlog
X is the unique Frobenius lifting over (Xlog)ord that has this property.
Proof. The existence of the isogeny follows from the fact that we have deﬁned a morphism
between the respective Dieudonn´e crystals that respects the Hodge ﬁltrations. This induces
the isogeny (see [BBM] and [Mess]). On the other hand, the uniqueness statement follows
from the uniqueness statement in Theorem 1.6, together with the fact that if a Frobenius
lifting induces such an isogeny, it automatically preserves the Hodge ﬁltrations on the
Dieudonn´e crystals. ⃝
136

Let n ≥ 0. Let Y = X0(n). Let Y ord ⊆ Y be the p-adic open formal subscheme
consisting of points lying over Xord. Now the Frobenius lifting of Theorem 3.1 allows us
to extend the decomposition in characteristic p of YFp into components corresponding to
(a, b)-cyclic isogenies to a decomposition overA = W(k), on the ordinary locus. To obtain
this decomposition, we deﬁne closed p-adic subschemes
X(a, b)ord ⊆ Xord ×A (Xord)Fa−b
via the same recipe as we did for X0(a, b), except using our canonical Frobenius lifting
Φlog
X :( Xlog)ord → ((Xlog)ord)F instead of Φ X0 . Then, just as before, we get a natural
embedding ι(a,b) : X(a, b)ord → Y ord (analogous to ι(a,b);0) which induces an isomorphism
Y ord ∼=
⋃
a+b=n
X(a, b)ord (disjoint union)
Finally, over Y ord, we have a tautological isogeny
Glog
Y ord → Hlog
Y ord
(where Glog
Y ord is the pull-back ofGlog to Y ord) such that overX(a, b)ord, Hlog
Y ord is naturally
isomorphic to the pull-back of ( Glog)Fa−b
via the projection X(a, b)ord → (Xord)Fa−b
to
the second factor.
Local Analysis at Supersingular Points
We now exploit the existence of the isogeny of Theorem 3.1 to understand the be-
havior of the canonical Frobenius lifting at the supersingular points. Let x ∈ X(k)b e
a supersingular point. In studying x, we will often need to involve its various Frobenius
conjugates xFi
∈ X(k) (which may be inﬁnite in number if the perfect ﬁeld k is not ﬁnite).
We begin our analysis by considering the double iterate of the Frobenius morphism over
some inﬁnitesimal neighborhood V ⊆ X
Fp at x:
Φ2
V : Glog|V → Glog|V F2
Thus, V is the spectrum of a local artinian ring, with residue ﬁeld k. Let us assume that
V is contained in the supersingular divisor (Chapter II, Proposition 2.6) of the canonical
indigenous bundle. By deﬁnition, this means that over V , the Hodge ﬁltration coincides
with the FL-bundle ﬁltration. It thus follows that over V , the kernels of the Verschiebung
and Frobenius morphisms coincide. Since the kernel of the composite of the Verschiebung
and the Frobenius is just the kernel of multiplication by p, it follows that the morphism
Φ
2
V is isomorphic to the morphism “multiplication on p.” In particular, it follows that
137

Glog|V F2 ∼= Glog|V
By iterating this isomorphism, we obtain that Glog|V is isomorphic to the pull-back to V
of a p-divisible group over k. Since the Kodaira-Spencer morphism of the Hodge ﬁltration
of (E, ∇ E) is an isomorphism, this implies that V must be Spec(k). Thus, the assumption
that V lies inside the supersingular divisor implies thatV is reduced. Put another way, we
see that we have proven (in this general context) the analogue of Igusa’s theorem ([KM],
p. 355):
Proposition 3.2. The supersingular divisor of the canonical indigenous bundle (E, ∇ E)
is ´etale over k.
Next, let us observe that for any x ∈ X(k), the completed local ring Rx of X at x
(which is formally smooth of dimension one overA) is naturally isomorphic to the universal
deformation space of the p-divisible group Glog|x. Indeed, it follows from the theory of
[Mess] that deformations of Glog|x are given by deformations of the Hodge ﬁltration; thus,
our observation follows from the fact that the Kodaira-Spencer morphism of the Hodge
ﬁltration of (E, ∇
E) is an isomorphism. Now suppose thatx ∈ X(k)i s supersingular.T h e n
the isomorphism
Glog|xF2 ∼= Glog|x
obtained above from the double iterate of Frobenius induces a natural isomorphism of
complete local rings
Ψx : RxF2 ∼= Rx
which will play an important role in the sequel.
Now ﬁx a number n ≥ 1, and let Y = X0(n). If x ∈ X(k), let us denote by Xx the
formal spectrum of X at x, i.e., Spf(Rx). We will use similar notation for Y .O v e rY ,w e
have a tautological cyclic isogeny of order pn:
Glog
Y → Hlog
Y
Fix a supersingular x ∈ X(k). By the analysis of [KM], reviewed in §2, there exists a
unique y ∈ Y (k) lying over x. Now by thinking of the completed local rings of X as
universal classifying spaces, we obtain a morphism:
(Dy, Ry): Yy → Xx ×A XxF n
138

where Dy is the classifying morphism for the “domain p-divisible group” Glog
Y ,a n dRy is
the classifying morphism for the “range p-divisible group”Hlog
Y . Here we use the fact that
restricted tox, the tautological isogeny is just thenth iterate of the Frobenius morphism, so
Hlog
Y |y = Glog
xF n . Also, note that by the deformation theory of [Mess], a deformation of the
tautological isogeny is uniquely determined by the induced deformations of the domain and
range p-divisible groups. It thus follows that the morphism (D
y, Ry) is formally unramiﬁed,
hence a closed immersion. Thus, henceforth, we shall think ofYy as a formal divisor inside
Xx × XxF n by means of the closed immersion (Dy, Ry).
One of the most important properties of this divisorYy is its symmetry. More precisely,
given Yy, one can obtain a divisor in XxF n × Xx in two ways:
(1) by applying the isomorphismXx ×XxF n ∼= XxF n ×Xx given by switch-
ing the two factors;
(2) by conjugating ﬁrst by the nth power of Frobenius, so as to obtain a
divisor in XxF n ×XxF2n and then applying the isomorphism Spf(Ψx)−n
to the second factor.
Then we claim that these two divisors in XxF n × Xx are the same. Indeed, to see this,
it suﬃces to trace what happens to the tautological isogeny. Let us consider the second
procedure stated above. First, we conjugate the tautological isogeny by Frobenius:
(G
log
Yy )Fn
→ (Hlog
Yy )Fn
Since at y, this isogeny is just the nth iterate of the Frobenius morphism, by looking at
Dieudonn´e modules, it follows that the kernel of this isogeny is contained in the kernel of
multiplication by pn. Thus, we get a morphism
(Hlog
Yy )Fn
→ (Glog
Yy )Fn
Since (Hlog
y )Fn
=( Glog
y )F2n
, we thus see that the divisor in XxF n × Xx obtained this
way is just the divisor of isogenies (lifting the nth iterate of Frobenius) from the universal
deformation of Glog
x (pulled back from the second factor) to the universal deformation of
(Glog
x )Fn
(pulled back from the ﬁrst factor). On the other hand, it we look at the divisor
obtained from the ﬁrst procedure stated above, it admits exactly the same description.
This proves the claim.
The next important property of this divisor Y
y ⊆ Xx × XxF n is that if we restrict it
to the ordinary locus, it becomes equal to the union of the “local versions” of the schemes
X(a, b)
ord (described at the end of the preceding subsection). More precisely, X(a, b)ord
is deﬁned as a closed subscheme of Xord × (Xord)Fa−b
.T h u s , w e o b t a i nX(a, b)ord|Xx ⊆
(Xord × (Xord)Fa−b
)Xx by restricting to the formal scheme Xx.S i n c ea − b ≡ a + b =
139

n(mod 2), by applying the appropriate power of Ψ x, we thus obtain a subscheme, which
we shall call
X(a, b)ord
x ⊆ (Xord × (Xord)Fn
)Xx
Then it follows from the functorial deﬁnition of Y (in terms of parametrizing isogenies)
that
Yy |Xord =
⋃
a+b=n
X(a, b)ord
x (disjoint union)
Let us denote the supersingular divisor of X by Xss. We are now ready to summarize
what we have done:
Deﬁnition 3.3. We shall call the pair
Hx
def
=( Yy;Ψ x)
consisting of the divisor Yy ⊆ Xx × XxF n and the isomorphism Ψx the nth canonical local
Hecke correspondence ofXlog at x. We shall call the triple
(Y → X;Φ log
X ; {Hx}x∈Xss )
the nth canonical pseudo-Hecke correspondence ofXlog.
Of course ideally, the local Hecke correspondences Hx would glue together to form a
global Hecke correspondence, i.e., a morphism Y → X × XFn
, just as in the classical case
with modular curves. We shall investigate this issue in the next subsection, but (unfortu-
nately) what we shall ﬁnd is that the existence of such global Hecke correspondences is a
rather rare phenomenon.
Global Hecke Correspondences
We maintain the notation of the previous subsection.
Deﬁnition 3.4. We shall say that the canonical curveX
log admits a global nth canonical
Hecke correspondenceif there exists a morphism
(D, R): Y → X × XFn
140

that is equal to the local morphisms (Dy, Ry) of the preceding subsection for every y ∈ Y
lying over a supersingular point of X.W e s a y t h a tXlog is of Hecke type if it admits a
global nth canonical Hecke correspondence for every n ≥ 1.
Proposition 3.5. Suppose that there exists an isomorphism Ψlog : Xlog → (Xlog)F2
that
induces the morphism Spf(Ψ x) when localized at every supersingularx ∈ X.T h e nXlog is
of Hecke type.
Proof. This follows immediately from gluing togetherY ord with the variousYy’s by means
of Ψlog. ⃝
Corollary 3.6. Suppose that Xlog, along with all of its supersingular points are deﬁned
over Fp2 .T h e nXlog is of Hecke type.
Proof. Over Fp2 ,o n ec a nt a k eΨlog to be the identity, for (by functoriality) the Ψx’s must
all be the identity. ⃝
The classical example of a case where Xlog is of Hecke type is the case where Xlog =
M
log
1,0, the compactiﬁed moduli stack of elliptic curves (over Zp). This case is studied in
detail in [Shi], Chapter 3. To see that the supersingular points are deﬁned over Fp2 ,o n e
repeats the argument preceding Proposition 3.2, to obtain an isomorphism EF2 ∼= E for
every supersingular elliptic curve E.
Suppose that Xlog is canonical of Hecke type. Then we remark that just as in the
classical case, one can deﬁne Hecke operators on H0(X, (ωlog
X/S)⊗N )Qp (as well as one the
´etale cohomology of Xlog
Qp , etc.). Moreover, (by the same proofs as in the classical case)
the eﬀect on q-expansions (where q is the Serre-Tate parameter at a marked point) is the
same as in the classical case. (See, e.g., [Lang] for more details.)
Next, we justify the assertion (made in the preceding subsection) that, in some sense,
being of Hecke type is a rather rare phenomenon. Indeed, if Xlog admits a global ﬁrst
canonical Hecke correspondence, consider its reduction modulo p:
(D, R)Fp : YFp → XFp × XF
Fp
Let Z = YFp .T h e nZ = Z′ ⋃Z′′,w i t hZ′ mapping isomorphically to XFp via DFp ,a n d
DFp |Z′′ isomorphic to the Frobenius morphism from Z′′ ∼= XF −1
Fp to XFp . On the other
hand, RFp must map Z′′ isomorphically to XF
Fp .T h u s ,Z′′ is isomorphic to both XF −1
Fp
and XF
Fp .I np a r t i c u l a r ,XFp
∼= XF2
Fp , i.e., the moduli of XFp are deﬁned over Fp2 ,w h i c h
is a very rare phenomenon.
141

Remark. At the present time, the author does not know of any canonical Xlog of
Hecke type, except for those that arise directly from the modular case.
§4. p-adic Green’s Functions
In this Section, we give a geometric criterion for a curve to be canonical: namely, the
existence of a Frobenius lifting of the right height, over an open p-adic formal subscheme
of the curve, with “nice behavior” at the points where it is not deﬁned. We will make
these terms precise below, but the point of interest is that this criterion does not depend
on knowing the action of the canonical Frobenius Φ
N on N
ord
g,r – that is, it is intrinsic
to the curve – and, moreover, it is not phrased in terms of indigenous bundles. Now in
the case of elliptic curves (regarded parabolically), the canonical lifting deﬁned in terms
of indigenous bundles is the same as the canonical lifting deﬁned in Serre-Tate theory
(one of the deﬁnitions of which is the existence of a global Frobenius lifting). Thus, it is
interesting to note that the existence of an “admissible Frobenius lifting” amounts to just
the existence of a Frobenius lifting (in the case of elliptic curves). In other words, one
may regard the geometric criterion given here as the proper hyperbolic generalization of
the statement that an elliptic curve (whose reduction modulo p is ordinary) is Serre-Tate
canonical if and only if it admits a Frobenius lifting.
Compactiﬁed Frobenius Liftings
In this subsection, motivated by the construction of the pseudo-Hecke correspondences
in the previous Section, we deﬁne the general notion of a “compactiﬁed Frobenius lifting.”
Let X
log → Slog be a smooth r-pointed curve of genus g.L e t
φlog : Y log → Xlog
be a ﬁnite, ﬂat morphism such that Y is regular (necessarily of dimension two), and the
log structure on Y log is deﬁned by a divisor on Y which is ´etale over A and equal to the
set-theoretic inverse image of the divisor of marked points of X.L e t U ⊆ X be an open
formal subscheme that contains all the marked points. We endowU with the log structure
pulled back from Xlog, and call the resulting log formal scheme Ulog. We shall use the
notation Xx, Yy, etc. (as in the previous subsection) to denote the formal schemes which
are the formal neighborhoods of the closed points x, y, etc. Suppose that
Φlog : Ulog → (Ulog)F
is a Frobenius lifting.
Deﬁnition 4.1. We shall say that (φlog : Y log → Xlog;ι)i sa naive compactiﬁcation of the
Frobenius liftingΦlog if, when we takeV = φ−1(U), the following conditions are satisﬁed:
142

(1) V log splits as a disjoint union (V log)′ ⋃(V log)′′;
(2) φlog|V ′ :( V log)′ → Ulog is an isomorphism;
(3) ιlog :( V log)′′ → (Ulog)F −1
is an isomorphism;
(4) φlog|V ′′ ◦(ιlog)−1 :( Ulog)F −1
→ Ulog is the morphism (Φlog)F −1
.
We shall frequently identify V ′ and U,a n dV ′′ and UF −1
.
Suppose that (φlog;ιlog) is a naive compactiﬁcation for Φlog. Note that φ is necessarily
of degree p + 1. Also, note that V ′ admits a canonical embedding
ι(1,0) : V ′ ↪→ U × UF
where we take ι(1,0) =( i d,Φ), while V ′′ admits an embedding
ι(0,1) : V ′′ ↪→ U × UF −1
where we take ι(0,1) = ((Φ)F −1
,id).
Let x ∈ X(k). Let
Ψx : RxF2 ∼= Rx
be an isomorphism. Suppose that y ∈ Y (k) maps to x.L e t
(Dy, Ry): Yy ↪→ Xx × XxF
be a closed embedding, where Dy is obtained by restricting φ.
Deﬁnition 4.2. We shall say thatHx
def
=( Ψ x;( Dy, Ry)) is a local compactiﬁcation for the
Frobenius lifting Φlog at x (relative to (φlog;ιlog)) if
(1) y is the unique closed point of Y lying over x;
(2) the divisor Yy ↪→ Xx × XxF is symmetric in the sense that the two
divisors that it induces in XxF × Xx (by switching and by Frobenius-
conjugating, then applying Ψx)a r et h es a m e ;
(3) the restriction of ( Dy, Ry)t o V is the union of ι(1,0),a n d( ι(0,1))F2
composed with Spf(Ψ x)−1 × (id).
143

Note that by the ﬁrst condition, x cannot lie in U.N o wl e tu sc o n s i d e r(Yy)Z/p2 Z.S i n c e
Yy ⊆ Xx × XxF , it follows that (Yy)Z/p2 Z is Spf of a local ring of the form:
R
def
=( A/p2A)[[ξ,η]]/ψ(ξ,η)
where ξ is a local parameter for ( Xx)Z/p2 Z,a n dη = ξF is the Frobenius-conjugate local
parameter for (XxF )Z/p2 Z.S i n c eYy → Xx is ﬂat, the last condition implies that ( Yy)Fp
has exactly two irreducible components, both of which are reduced. Thus, if we denote by
a “bar” the reduction of functions modulo p, we see that ψ is a product of two distinct
prime elements of k[[ξ,η]]. In fact, we can say more. Outside the special point of ( Yy)Fp ,
these two primes deﬁne the closed subschemes ξ
p
− η and ηp − Ψx(ξ
F2
). Let
f = ξp − η; g = ηp − Ψx(ξF2
)
Thus, we may assume that ψ = f · g. In other words, we can write
ψ = f · g + π
where π ∈ p · k[[ξ,η]]. In fact, π is actually p times a unit in k[[ξ,η]], since Yy is regular.
So far we have been working with functions on ( Yy)Z/p2 Z. Now let us restrict to
functions on the open formal subscheme D(g) ⊆ (Yy)Z/p2 Z (i.e., where g is invertible).
Thus, we are in eﬀect restricting to the graph of Φ. Let us denote the restriction morphism
on functions by ζ: R → R[1/g]. Then we obtain, in R[1/g],
ζ(η)= ζ(ξ)
p + ζ(π) · ζ(g)−1
By interpreting this open formal subscheme D(g) as the graph of Φ, this tells us that
Φ−1(ξF ) is a function which is not regular at x, but has a pole of order one (since g has a
zero of order one). In particular, it tells us that the Frobenius lifting Φ does not admit a
regular extension to any neighborhood of x. We summarize this as follows:
Proposition 4.3. If Hx is a local compactiﬁcation of Φlog at x,t h e n(Yy)Fp is a node,
and x/∈ U. Also, the Frobenius lifting Φ does not admit an extension to any neighborhood
of x.
Deﬁnition 4.4. We shall call
C =( φlog;ιlog; {Hx}x/∈U )
144

a compactiﬁcation of the Frobenius lifting Φlog if (φ;ι) is a naive compactiﬁcation of Φ log,
and for each x/∈ U, we are given a local compactiﬁcation Hx of Φlog relative to ( φ;ι)
(where k in the deﬁnition above is replaced by the ﬁeld of rationality of x).
Thus, in particular, by what we did in the last two subsections,
Proposition 4.5. Suppose that Xlog is a canonical curve. Then its ﬁrst canonical
pseudo-Hecke correspondence is a compactiﬁcation of the canonical Frobenius lifting on
(X
log)ord.
Suppose that (φlog;ιlog; {Hx}x/∈U ) is a compactiﬁcation of Φlog. Let us consider Z
def
=
YFp . It follows from the above deﬁnition that Z is reduced and has exactly two irreducible
components Z′ and Z′′ with V ′
Fp ⊆ Z′; V ′′
Fp ⊆ Z′′.S i n c eZ′ is geometrically connected,
smooth, proper, and birationally equivalent to XFp over k, it follows that Z′ ∼= XFp .
Similarly, Z′′ ∼= XF −1
Fp . Moreover, except at the points of intersection ofZ′ and Z′′ (which
are nodes), Z is smooth over k.
Proposition 4.6. (Assuming that Xlog is hyperbolic) Y must be connected.
Proof. It suﬃces to prove that Z is connected. Suppose that Z is not connected.T h e n
φZ′ : Z′ → XFp is ﬁnite and birational, hence an isomorphism. It thus follows that Z′
lifts to a connected component Y ′ of Y such that φY ′ : Y ′ → X is an isomorphism.
On the other hand, Z′′ is proper and smooth over k, and birational to XF −1
Fp , hence
Z′′ ∼= XF −1
Fp ,a n dφ|Z′′ : Z′′ → XFp is the Frobenius morphism. Moreover, Z′′ lifts to a
connected component Y ′′ of Y .T h u s ,φ|Y ′ : Y ′′ → X is a Frobenius lifting. But if Xlog is
hyperbolic, such Frobenius liftings cannot exist, for the nonzero morphism of line bundles
(φ|
Y ′′ )∗ωlog
X/S → ωlog
Y ′′/S violates degree restrictions. ⃝
The Height of a Frobenius Lifting
Finally, we note that often it is useful to have a precise measure of how far a Frobenius
lifting fails to extend over all of X. For this, we introduce the notion of the height of a
Frobenius lifting, as follows.
Let F→ XFp be the TFp -torsor of Frobenius liftings on open sub-log schemes of
Xlog
Z/p2 Z.T h u s , i f Φlog : Ulog → (Ulog)F is a Frobenius lifting, its reduction modulo p2
deﬁnes a section σΦ : UFp →F of this torsor. Let P be the projective bundle that
canonically compactiﬁes F.T h u s ,P → XFp is a P1-bundle. Recall the notion of the
canonical height of a section of P → XFp , introduced at the beginning of Chapter I, §2.
Since XFp is proper overk, it follows thatσΦ extends uniquely to a sectionσΦ : XFp → P.
We now make the following
145

Deﬁnition 4.7. We deﬁne the height ht(Φ) of the Frobenius liftingΦlog to be the canonical
height of the section σΦ of P → XFp .
More concretely, the height of Φlog c a nb ed e ﬁ n e da sf o l l o w s .I fx ∈ Xlog
Fp ,t h e nl e tt be a
local parameter of Xlog at x.L e tΞx be a local Frobenius lifting deﬁned in a neighborhood
of x.T h e n1
p (Ξ−1
x (t) − Φ−1(t)) is a rational function δx on Xlog
Fp . Let us say that the local
height htx(Φ) of Φlog at x is:
(1) equal to 0 if this function δx is regular at x;
(2) equal to the order of the pole of δx at x otherwise.
Then we have the formula:
Proposition 4.8. We have
ht(Φ) + p
2(2g − 2+ r)=
∑
x∈Xlog
Fp
[k(x): k]h tx(Φ)
Proof. This follows immediately from considering the intersection number ofσΦ with the
“section at inﬁnity” given by the complement of F in P. ⃝
Corollary 4.9. If Φlog admits a compactiﬁcation, then the local heights at points outside
U are all one. Thus,
ht(Φ) = − p
2(2g − 2+ r)+d e gk(X − U)Fp
where we regard(X − U)Fp as having the reduced, induced scheme structure.
Proof. The statement about local heights follows from the explicit computation preceding
Proposition 4.3. ⃝
The following is the main result of this subsection:
Proposition 4.10. If Φlog has height ≤ 1−g− 1
2 r,t h e nP (with its connection∇P induced
by that of F) is a nilpotent, admissible indigenous bundle. In particular, if(P, ∇P ) is also
ordinary, then Xlog is isomorphic to a canonical curve modulop2,a n dΦlog is equal to the
canonical Frobenius lifting (of Theorem 3.1) modulop2.
146

Proof. Indeed, suppose that ht(Φ) ≤ 1 − g − 1
2 r. Consider the Kodaira-Spencer morphism
of the section σΦ of P → X. By the general properties of FL-bundles (Chapter II, §1),
we know that the Kodaira-Spencer morphism cannot vanish (for the section at inﬁnity of
P → X is the unique horizontal section). But by degree considerations (i.e., the assumption
on ht(Φ)), once the Kodaira-Spencer morphism is nonzero, it must be an isomorphism. It
thus follows that P (with its connection induced by that of F) is a nilpotent, admissible
indigenous bundle. The last statement follows from the construction of the canonical lifting
and the canonical Frobenius. ⃝
Thus, we see that the compactiﬁed Frobenius liftings that we are really interested in
are the ones that “look nice modulo p:”
Deﬁnition 4.11. A compactiﬁed Frobenius lifting
C =( φ
log;ιlog; {Hx}x/∈U )
is called admissible if
(1) ht(Φ) = g − 1+ 1
2 r;
(2) the associated (P, ∇P ) (as in Proposition 4.10) is ordinary;
(3) the reductions modulo p of the isomorphisms Ψ x (that make up Hx)
are equal to the canonical “Ψ x” of Deﬁnition 3.3.
Note that for an admissible compactiﬁed Frobenius C, all the objects involved (that is,
Φlog; φlog : Y log → Xlog; ιlog;Ψ x;( Dy, Ry)) are completely determined modulo p (up to
isomorphism) once one ﬁxes the supersingular divisor (X − U)Fp . Or, in other words,
Proposition 4.12. An admissible compactiﬁed Frobenius C on Xlog determines a p-adic
quasiconformal equivalence class α to which Xlog belongs. If two admissible compactiﬁed
Frobenii C and C′ on Xlog determine the same α, then, modulo p, all the objects that make
up C are isomorphic to those that make up C′.
Admissible Frobenius Liftings
Since an admissible compactiﬁed Frobenius is determined modulo p by the p-adic
quasiconformal equivalence class α, the next step is to understand what the possible de-
formations looks like. Let C be an admissible compactiﬁed Frobenius, and let us consider
CZ/p2 Z, i.e., the reductions modulo p2 of all the objects involved. Suppose we start with
147

the data (Φlog)Z/p2 Z;( Ψx)Z/p2 Z (for all supersingular x). Now it is easy to see (by looking
at points valued in an arbitrary scheme) that the symmetry condition on the divisor Yy
amounts to the statement that (Ψx)Z/p2 Z restricted to the ordinary locus commutes with
ΦZ/p2 Z.
Let β be an automorphism of (Xx)Z/p2 Z which is equal to the identity modulop.T h e n
we claim that if ΦZ/p2 Z commutes with β,t h e nβ is the identity. Indeed, since derivations
on XFp act trivially on functions that are pth powers, we get that
ΦZ/p2Z ◦β =Φ Z/p2Z
Thus,
βF ◦ΦZ/p2Z =Φ Z/p2Z
which implies that β is the identity, since ΦZ/p2 Z is faithfully ﬂat. Thus, in summary, the
(Ψx)Z/p2 Z are determined uniquely by the condition that they commute with ΦZ/p2Z.
Next, we consider Y log. We can break Y log up into three parts: (V log)′;( V log)′′;a n d
the Yy’s. Since (V log)′ and (V log)′′ are determined up to natural isomorphism by Xlog,i t
remains to determine theYy’s, and the gluing morphisms. ButYy and its gluing morphisms
to (V log)′ and (V log)′′ are completely speciﬁed once one knows the divisorYy in Xx ×XXF .
Moreover, it follows from the condition (3) of Deﬁnition 4.2, that this divisor is determined
by Φ and Ψx. But we just saw that (Ψx)Z/p2 Z is determined by ΦZ/p2 Z. Thus, we conclude
that (Hx)Z/p2 Z and φlog
Z/p2 Z are completely determined by ΦZ/p2Z. Sorting through all the
deﬁnitions, we thus see that we have proven that CZ/p2 Z is entirely determined by the
p-adic quasiconformal equivalence class α and the deformation ΦZ/p2Z. Moreover, there is
nothing special about working modulo p2: the same arguments can be made modulo an
arbitrary power of p. Thus, we see that we have proven the following result:
Lemma 4.13. Let C be an admissible compactiﬁed Frobenius lifting onXlog.T h e nCZ/pn Z
is completely determined by Φlog
Z/pn Z.
This Lemma suggests the following deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 4.14. Let α be a p-adic quasiconformal equivalence class to which Xlog
belongs. Let U ⊆ X be the ordinary locus forα.L e tΦlog : Ulog → (Ulog)F be a Frobenius
lifting overUlog. Then we shall say that Φlog is an admissible Frobenius lifting for(Xlog,α)
if it arises from a (necessarily unique) admissible compactiﬁed Frobenius C.
Thus, we can can regard admissible Frobenius liftings as being Frobenius liftings (over the
ordinary locus) that happen to have special behavior near the supersingular points.
148

Next let us consider two admissible Frobenius liftings Φ log and (Φlog)′ on the same
curve Xlog. Let us suppose that they are equal modulopn (where n ≥ 2). In this discussion,
we shall always be working modulo pn+1, so (by abuse of notation) we shall use Φlog and
(Φlog)′ to denote the respective reductions modulo pn+1. Now just as in the discussion
preceding Proposition 4.3, for Φlog,( Yy)Z/pn+1 Z is Spf of a local ring of the form:
R
def
=( A/pn+1A)[[ξ,η]]/ψ(ξ,η)
where ξis a local parameter for (Xx)Z/pn+1 Z,a n dη= ξF is the Frobenius-conjugate local
parameter for (XxF )Z/pn+1 Z. Moreover, we may assume that
ψ = f · g + π
where
f = ξp − η; g = ηp − Ψx(ξF2
)
and π ∈ p · (A/pnA)[[ξ,η]]. In fact, π is actually p times a unit, since Yy is regular.
Similarly, for (Φlog)′,w eh a v e
R′ def
=( A/pn+1A)[[ξ,η]]/ψ′(ξ,η)
with ψ′ = f · g′ + π′,a n dg′ = ηp − Ψ ′
x(ξF2
). Thus,
g ≡ g′(mod pn); π ≡ π′(mod pn)
So far we have been working with functions on ( Yy)Z/pn+1 Z. Now let us restrict to
the open subscheme corresponding to the graph of Φ (or Φ′). Let us denote the restriction
morphism on functions by ζ. Then we obtain, on this open subscheme, in the unprimed
case:
ζ(η)= ζ(ξ)p + ζ(π) · ζ(g)−1
and, in the primed case:
ζ(η)= ζ(ξ)p + ζ(π′) · ζ(g′)−1
= ζ(ξ)p + ζ(π′) · ζ(g)−1
since the diﬀerence between g and g′ becomes zero when multiplied by p. Ultimately, we
are interested in computing the diﬀerence between the two Frobenius liftings Φ and Φ ′.
149

That is, we wish to understand the diﬀerence between whereηis taken by the two liftings.
But by the above formulas, the diﬀerence is of the form:
{ζ(π) − ζ(π′)}(ζ(g))−1
Moreover, because the diﬀerence in brackets is divisible bypn, only the residue ofg modulo
p is involved in the above expression. Since this residue has a zero of order exactly one at
x, it follows that the diﬀerence between the two Frobenius liftings – which forms a section
of TFp over Xord – has poles of order at most one at the supersingular points. Since the
morphism
HTFp : TFp → (τXlog/Slog )Fp
(given by composing the p-curvature of (P, ∇P ) with the projection given by the Hodge
ﬁltration) has zeroes at the supersingular points, it thus follows that the diﬀerence between
Φ
log and (Φlog)′ deﬁnes a global section of ( τXlog/Slog )Fp . Since we are dealing with hy-
perbolic curves, though, (τXlog/Slog )Fp has negative degree, hence has no global sections.
Thus, Φlog =( Φlog)′. In summary, we have proven the following strengthened form of
Lemma 4.13:
Lemma 4.15. If there exists an admissible Frobenius lifting of(Xlog,α), then it is unique,
and contains no nontrivial deformations modulo any power of p.
Geometric Criterion for Canonicality
Let us ﬁx Xlog → Slog,as m o o t hr-pointed curve of genus g,a n da p-adic quasicon-
formal equivalence class α to which Xlog belongs. Let Φ log be an admissible Frobenius
lifting for (Xlog,α).
Now suppose that ˜Xlog → Slog is also a smooth r-pointed curve of genus g such that
( ˜Xlog)Fp = Xlog
Fp . The following “Rigidity Lemma” is fundamental to this subsection:
Lemma 4.16. Suppose that ( ˜Xlog,α) admits an admissible Frobenius lifting(Φlog)′.T h e n
˜Xlog = Xlog.
Proof. We propose to prove inductively (on n) the following statement:
(*) ( ˜Xlog,(Φlog)′) coincides with (Xlog,Φlog) modulo pn+1.
We know that this statement holds for n = 0. Assume that it holds for n − 1. Consider
the diﬀerence between the deformations Xlog
Z/pn+1 Z and ˜Xlog
Z/pn+1Z of Xlog
Z/pnZ. It deﬁnes a
class
150

μ ∈ H1(XFp ,(τXlog/Slog )Fp )
Let C (respectively, C′) be the compactiﬁed Frobenius corresponding to Φlog (respectively,
(Φlog)′). Since Y log
Z/pnZ =( Y log)′
Z/pn Z, we can consider the diﬀerence between the defor-
mations Y log
Z/pn+1Z and (Y log)′
Z/pn+1 Z of Y log
Z/pn Z. This gives us a class
ν ∈ Ext1
YFp
(ΩY log
Fp /k, OYFp )
Since φZ/pnZ = φ′
Z/pnZ, the pull-back map deﬁned by either of these morphisms gives us
am a pφ−1 : φ∗(ωlog
X/S)Fp → ΩY log
Fp /k, which is generically zero over the component of YFp
that we called Z′′ in the proof of Proposition 4.6. Now φ−1 induces a pull-back morphism
on global Ext’s
ψ :E x t1
YFp
(ΩY log
Fp /k, OYFp ) → H1(YFp ,φ∗(τXlog/Slog )Fp )
The condition that the morphism φZ/pn+1 Z deform compatibly with the deformation of
(Xlog,Y log)Z/pn+1 Z to ( ˜Xlog,(Y ′)log)Z/pn+1 Z to a morphism φ′
Z/pn+1Z is exactly that
ψ(ν)= μ|YFp
Note that this condition, as well as the cohomology modules in which μ and ν live,
are independent of n. Thus, by adding μ and ν to φlog
Z/p2 Z : Y log
Z/p2 Z → Xlog
Z/p2 Z, we obtain
a new morphism ˆφlog : ˆY log → ˆXlog (of Z/p2Z-ﬂat schemes). Then, by restricting ˆφlog to
the open subscheme of ˆY log deﬁned by the ordinary locus of Z′′, we obtain a Frobenius
lifting Ξlog on the ordinary locus of ˆXlog. The only points at which Ξ is not deﬁned are
the supersingular points (determined byα). Moreover, by the calculation of the discussion
preceding Proposition 4.3, it follows that the local height of Ξlog at a supersingular point
is ≤ 1. Indeed, in the notation of loc. cit.,“ π”i se q u a lt op times an element of k[[ξ,η]],
which, this time, might not be a unit since ˆY log might not be the reduction modulo p2 of
a regular scheme; hence the inequality ≤ 1, rather than the sharp equality = 1. At any
rate, it thus follows that ht(Ξ)≤ ht(ΦZ/p2 Z). But then, by Proposition 4.10, ˆXlog is equal
to some canonical curve reduced modulo p2, and, by Proposition 2.6, (4), of Chapter II, it
thus follows that this canonical curve is the one determined by α.T h u s ,ˆXlog = Xlog
Z/p2 Z.
But this means that μ =0 ,s o Xlog and ˜Xlog coincide modulo pn+1. By Lemma 4.15
(the rigidity of an admissible Frobenius lifting), it thus follows that Φ log and (Φlog)′ also
coincide modulo pn+1. This proves the induction step, and hence the Lemma. ⃝
Putting everything together, we see that we have proven the following geometric
criterion for a curve to be canonical:
151

Theorem 4.17. Let Xlog → Slog be a smooth r-pointed curve of genus g.L e t α be a
p-adic quasiconformal equivalence to which Xlog belongs. Then Xlog is canonical if and
only if (Xlog,α) admits an admissible Frobenius lifting.
Proof. We saw in§3 that a canonical curve admits an admissible Frobenius lifting. On the
other hand, given an (Xlog,α) which admits an admissible Frobenius lifting, there exists
an ( ˜Xlog,α)( w i t h˜Xlog ≡ Xlog modulo p) which is canonical, hence admits an admissible
Frobenius lifting. Thus, by Lemma 4.16, it follows that Xlog = ˜Xlog. ⃝
Deﬁnition 4.18. Suppose that ( Xlog,α) admits an admissible Frobenius lifting Φ log.
Then we shall call Φlog the p-adic Green’s function.
Remark. The justiﬁcation for this terminology is as follows. In the classical complex case,
one of the main approaches to proving that hyperbolic curves can be uniformized by the
upper half plane is given by constructing a Green’s function on the universal covering
space of the Riemann surface (see, e.g., [FK]). Once one proves that the universal covering
space is just the upper half plane, then one sees that this Green’s function is really just
the logarithm of the hyperbolic distance between two points. On the other hand, the
canonical Frobenius lifting Φ
log may also be regarded as giving us a notion of distance
on Xlog. Indeed, in the classical modular case, where Xlog parametrizes elliptic curves, if
one can get from point a to point b by applying Φlog a total of N times, then it means
that the corresponding elliptic curves are isogenous via a cyclic isogeny of orderpN .T h u s ,
the analogy between Φ log and the classical complex Green’s function (which is just the
logartihm of the hyperbolic distance) will be established once one accepts that isogeny
is the proper analogue of distance. But to see this, one need merely think of lattices in
Q
2
p, which one can draw schematically as a graph. Then two lattices are related by an
isogeny of order pN if and only if they are N edges apart on this graph. This establishes
the relationship between isogeny and distance.
Remark. We also observe that for elliptic curves (regarded parabolically), the same deﬁ-
nition of compactiﬁed Frobenius liftings, and admissible Frobenius liftings goes through,
but everything is trivial, since there are no supersingular points to contend with. Thus, we
(trivially) obtain the analogue of Theorem 4.17: that an elliptic curve overA with ordinary
reduction is canonical if and only if it admits a Frobenius lifting deﬁned everywhere on the
curve.
152

Chapter V: Uniformizations of Ordinary Curves
§0. Introduction
Having studied the case of canonical curves in the previous Chapter, in this Chapter
we turn to the case of arbitrary curves with ordinary reduction modulo p.W ed ot h i sb y
working with the universal case: i.e., the universal curve over the moduli stack. Unlike
the canonical case, one does not quite obtain such objects as the canonical Galois rep-
resentation or the canonical log p-divisible group over the given base. Instead, one must
pass to various “schemes of multiplicative periods” – i.e., certain inﬁnite coverings of the
original base – in order to obtain such objects. On the other hand, since these objects
are canonically associated to the curve over the given base, it is natural to guess that they
should descend from the scheme of multiplicative periods back down to the original base in
some appropriate sense. The key idea here is that, for instance in the case of the canonical
Galois representation (which is fundamental to the construction of all the other objects),
if one works with modules of rank two, not over Z
p, but over some appropriate ring of
p-adic periods DGal, then one can in fact construct a canonical Galois representationover
the original base. Thus, one obtains a representation of the entire arithmetic fundamental
group into GL±
2 (DGal), which in some sense extends the representation of the geometric
fundamental group into GL±
2 (Zp). Moreover, (in the hyperbolic case) this representation
of the arithmetic fundamental group into GL±
2 (DGal) is canonical, and dual crystalline in
some appropriate sense, despite the fact that (unlike the case handled in [Falt], §2), it is
on a space of inﬁnite rank over Zp. The process of passing from the canonical representa-
tion of the geometric fundamental group into GL±
2 (Zp) to the canonical representation of
the arithmetic fundamental group into GL±
2 (DGal) is a sort of crystalline analogue of the
notion of an induced representation in group theory. We therefore refer to this process as
the process of crystalline induction.
Once one has this canonical dual crystalline representation of the arithmetic funda-
mental group into GL
±
2 (DGal), one can linearize the obstruction to extending the repre-
sentation of the geometric fundamental group into GL±
2 (Zp) to the full arithmetic funda-
mental group. This linearization tells one, for instance, that as soon as one can extend
the representation of the geometric fundamental group into GL
±
2 (Zp) at all to the arith-
metic fundamental group, this extension is automatically dual crystalline. This procedure
of linearizing the obstruction also allows one to see that this obstruction is precisely the
hyperbolic analogue of the obstruction to splitting a certain exact sequence ofp-adic local
systems on the moduli stack of ordinary elliptic curves (in the parabolic case).
§1. Crystalline Induction
In Chapter III, we constructed a Frobenius-invariant indigenous bundle on the univer-
sal curve over
N
ord
g,r . Unfortunately, unlike the case of a canonical curve, such information
153

does not immediately constitute an object of the category MF∇ (see [Falt], §2), so we
cannot immediately convert it into a Galois representation. The problem is that our con-
nection on the indigenous bundle is only arelative connection (for the universal curveover
N
ord
g,r ), not a full connection on the total space of the universal curve. Also, the obstruction
to extending it to a full connection on the total space of the universal curve is nonzero.
Thus, in order to obtain a Galois representation, we must replace the indigenous bundle
by a certain natural “thickening” of the indigenous bundle. This thickening formally car-
ries the structure of an object of the category MF
∇ , but has the disadvantage of being
of inﬁnite rank, so that we cannot immediately apply the theory of [Falt] to this object.
Fortunately, it is not diﬃcult to extend the theory of [Falt] so as to handle such objects of
inﬁnite rank. We thus obtain a Galois representation, as desired, which turns out to be a
sort of crystalline analogue of the notion of an “induced representation” in group theory.
The Crystalline-Induced MF
∇ -object
Let p be an odd prime. LetS be formally smooth overA
def
= W(k), where k is a perfect
ﬁeld of characteristic p. Let us assume that S is endowed with a log structure induced by
a relative divisor with normal crossings over W(k). Let Slog be the resulting log formal
scheme. Let flog : Xlog → Slog be an r-pointed stable curve of genusg. Also, let us assume
that the classifying morphism S → Mg,r deﬁned by flog is ´etale.L e t Φlog : Slog → Slog
be an ordinary Frobenius lifting.
Now let us suppose that our indigenous bundle (E, ∇ E)o n Xlog is invariant under the
renormalized Frobenius(Chapter III, Deﬁnition 1.4): that is,
ΦE :( E, ∇ E) ∼= F∗
Slog (E, ∇ E)Φ
where the superscript “Φ” denotes pull-back by Φ, and the subscript “Slog” denotes that we
are considering the relative renormalized Frobenius pull-back over Slog. (We shall denote
by F∗
A the renormalized Frobenius pull-back over A.)
Let DS be the quasi-coherent OS-algebra (with the OS-action from the right) which is
obtained by taking thep-adic completion of the PD-envelope of the diagonal embedding of
Slog in Slog ×A Slog (see, e.g., [Kato], §5.8). Thus, DS has an ideal IS ⊆D S with DS/IS =
OS,a n d IS/I2
S ∼= Ωlog
S/A =Ω log
S . Note that DS has a natural logarithmic connection
∇ DS . We shall regard DS as a ﬁltered object with connection, whose ﬁltration is given by
Fi(DS)= I[i]
S (i.e., divided powers of IS). Thus, the Kodaira-Spencer morphism for the
subquotient of the ﬁltration given byF1(DS)/F2(DS)= IS/I2
S ∼= Ωlog
S is the identity map.
Note that the Frobenius lifting Φlog on Slog induces a morphism ΦDS :Φ ∗DS →D S which
preserves the Hodge ﬁltration. Finally, let us denote by (( DS)X, ∇(DS)X ) the pull-back of
(DS, ∇ DS )t o Xlog.
Next, let us consider the obstruction to deﬁning a full logarthmic connection ∇ on E
(i.e., relative to Xlog → Spec(A)) with the following properties:
154

(1) ∇ has trivial determinant;
(2) the restriction of ∇ to a relative connection (for Xlog → Slog)i s ∇ E;
(3) the curvature of ∇ is an Ad( E)-valued section of ∧2Ωlog
S (i.e., the
ωlog
X/S ⊗OS Ωlog
S -part of the curvature vanishes).
It is easy to see that the obstruction class to deﬁning such a connection is a section ηE of
R1fDR,∗Ad(E) ⊗OS Ωlog
S = F0(R1fDR,∗Ad(E) ⊗OS Ωlog
S )
whose projection to R1f∗τXlog/Slog ⊗OS Ωlog
S is the identity. Also, note that Φ log and ΦE
induce a Frobenius action on R1fDR,∗Ad(E) ⊗OS Ωlog
S , which, by naturality, preservesηE.
Thus, in particular, we see that unless we modify E in some way, there is no hope of
constructing a full connection ∇ as speciﬁed above.
Thus, we make the following construction. Let us write Slog PD
× Slog for Spf( DS)
(where we take “Spf” with respect to the p-adic topology). Similarly, we shall write
Slog PD
× Slog PD
× Slog, Xlog PD
× Xlog, etc. for the obvious p-adic completions of PD-
envelopes at the respective diagonals. Also, we have two projections πR,πL : Slog PD
×
Slog → Slog to the left and right by which we can pull-back Xlog → Slog to obtain curves
(Xlog)L → Slog PD
× Slog,a n d( Xlog)R → Slog PD
× Slog. Moreover, both of these curves
form PD-thickenings of Xlog → Slog ↪→ Slog PD
× Slog (where the second morphism is the
diagonal embedding). It thus follows that if we pull-back (E, ∇ E) to obtain an indigenous
bundle on the curve ( Xlog)L → Slog PD
× Slog, this indigenous bundle deﬁnes a crystal
on Crys(Xlog/(Slog PD
× Slog)) which we can then evaluate on the thickening ( Xlog)R to
obtain a rank two vector bundleE′ (on XR). If we then push this sheaf E′ forward via the
projection XR → X, we obtain a quasi-coherent sheaf ED on X.M o r e o v e r ,ED has the
structure of a DS-module, hence of a ( DS)X-module. In fact, ED is a locally free ( DS)X-
module of rank two. Moreover, ED is equipped with a natural Hodge ﬁltration compatible
with that of (DS)X.
Next, we would like to equip ED with a full logarithmic connection that is compatible
with its structure as a ( DS)X-module and the connection on ( DS)X. First, note that
Xlog PD
× Slog PD
× Slog → Slog PD
× Slog PD
× Slog is a PD-thickening of Xlog → Slog ↪→
Slog PD
× Slog PD
× Slog (where the second morphism is the diagonal embedding). Thus, if we
pull-back (E, ∇ E)t o Xlog PD
× Slog PD
× Slog, we obtain a crystal E′′ on Crys(Xlog/(Slog PD
×
Slog PD
× Slog)). On the other hand, Slog PD
× Xlog PD
× Xlog → Slog PD
× Slog PD
× Slog is also
a PD-thickening of Xlog → Slog ↪→ Slog PD
× Slog PD
× Slog. Thus, if we evaluate E′′ on
Slog PD
× Xlog PD
× Xlog, and then push forward via the projection Slog PD
× Xlog PD
× Xlog →
155

Xlog PD
× Xlog, we obtain a sheaf E′′′ on Xlog PD
× Xlog.N o w s i n c e (DS)X is equipped
with a connection, the two pull-backs of ( DS)X to Xlog PD
× Xlog via the two projections
πX
R ,πX
L : Xlog PD
× Xlog → Xlog can be identiﬁed; we denote the resulting sheaf of algebras
on Xlog PD
× Xlog by (DS)
Xlog
PD
× Xlog
.T h e nE′′′ is equipped with the structure of a locally free
(DS)
Xlog
PD
× Xlog
-module of rank two. On the other hand, from the deﬁnition ofED, it follows
that both (πX
L )∗ED and (πX
R )∗ED are naturally isomorphic (as (DS)
Xlog
PD
× Xlog
-modules) to
E′′′, hence to each other. This isomorphism (πX
L )∗ED ∼= (πX
R )∗ED on Xlog PD
× Xlog deﬁnes
a full logarithmic connection ∇ ED on ED (with respect to Xlog → Spec(A)). Moreover,
one checks easily that this connection is integral.
Finally, we have a Frobenius action
ΦED : F∗
Slog (ED ⊗DS,ΦDS
DS) ∼= ED
Here, in the deﬁnition of F∗
Slog , we ﬁrst pull back the relevant crystal by means of relative
Frobenius, and then consider the subsheaf consisting of sections whose reduction modulo
p is contained in the subsheaf of
Φ
∗
XFp
(ED ⊗DS,ΦDS
DS)Fp
∼= (Φ∗
XFp
EFp ) ⊗OS DS
given by
(Φ∗
XFp
F1(E)Fp ) ⊗OS DS ⊆ (Φ∗
XFp
EFp ) ⊗OS DS
Theorem 1.1. Over Xlog, there exists a natural, locally free, rank two(DS)X-module ED
equipped with a Hodge ﬁltration, a full integrable logarithmic connection ∇ ED (relative to
Xlog → Spec(A)), and a Frobenius action
ΦED : F∗
Slog (ED ⊗DS,ΦDS
DS) ∼= ED
such that ED ⊗DS (DS/IS)= E.
The Ring of Additive Periods
Before we can convert the induced object of Theorem 1.1 into a Galois representation,
we must ﬁrst study the Galois representation associated to DS, with its natural ﬁltration,
connection, and Frobenius action. Once we have done this, since ED is of ﬁnite rank over
156

DS, converting ED into a Galois representation will be no more diﬃcult than the “classical
case” discussed in [Falt],§2.
Let us ﬁrst note that, just as when we constructed “canonical aﬃne coordinates” in
Chapter III, §1, by considering the slopes of the Frobenius action ΦDS , we obtain a unique
Frobenius-equivariant embedding of OS-modules
Ωlog
S ↪→I S
whose composite with the projection IS →I S/I2
S =Ω log
S is the identity. It is here that
we use the divided powers of IS ⊆D S. Let us write Geo( DS) for the subbundle of DS
generated by Ωlog
S and OS. Note that Geo( DS) is stabilized by ∇ DS and by Frobenius.
Moreover, the Hodge ﬁltration on DS induces a Hodge ﬁltration on Geo( DS). Observe
that with this extra data, Geo(DS) becomes isomorphic to the uniformizing MF∇ -object
associated to Φlog (of Deﬁnition 1.3 of Chapter III).
Now we want to pass to Galois representations. Let us assume that we have chosen
(once and for all) a base-point of S that avoids the divisors deﬁning the log structure. In
the following, our fundamental groups will be with respect to this base-point. Since our
construction will be canonical, we can work ´etale locally on S. Thus, we can assume that
S is aﬃne. We may also assume that S
log is small (in the sense of [Falt], §2): that is, Slog
is log ´etale over A[T1,... ,Td] (with the log structure given by the divisorT1 · ... · Td). We
shall call these parameters T1,... ,Td small parameters. Then we would like to consider
the ring B+(Slog) of [Falt], §2. We will not review the deﬁnition of this ring here, since it
is rather involved, but roughly speaking, it is obtained by
(1) taking the normalization ˜S of Slog in the maximal covering of Slog
K
which is ´etale in characteristic zero;
(2) reducing ˜S modulo p and taking its perfection;
(3) taking the Witt ring with coeﬃcients in this perfection;
(4) adjoining the divided powers of a certain ideal to this Witt ring; and
(5) ﬁnally, completing with respect to a certain topology.
In particular,
(1) B
+(Slog) is obtained as the inverse limit of a projective system of PD-
thickenings of the OSFp -algebra ˜SFp ;
(2) B+(Slog) has an ideal I+ ⊆ B+(Slog) which is Galois-invariant and
such that B+(Slog)/I+ ∼= ˜S∧ (i.e., the p-adic completion of ˜S).
157

Moreover, B+(Slog) comes equipped with a natural Frobenius action (which we shall denote
by means of a superscripted “F”), as well as a continuousπ1(Slog
K )-action, which commutes
with the Frobenius. The Frobenius invariants of B+(Slog) are given by Zp ⊆ B+(Slog).
There is a Galois equivariant injection β : Zp(1) ↪→ B+(Slog). Frequently, we shall abuse
notation and write β ∈ B+(Slog) for the element of B+(Slog) obtained by applying β to
some generator of Zp(1). Then the Frobenius action on β takes β to p · β. We will denote
by B(Slog) the ring obtained from B+(Slog)b yi n v e r t i n gβ and p. This completes our
review of B+(−).
Now let us return to the speciﬁc situation we have at hand. By thinking of (DS, ∇ DS )
as a crystal, and using the fact that B+(Slog) is an inverse limit of PD-thickenings of a
certain OSFp -algebra, one can evaluate this crystal onB+(Slog) (and complete p-adically)
to obtain a B+(Slog)-module which we shall denote by
DS ˆ⊗OS B+(Slog)
(where the “hat” denotes p-adic completion). Alternatively, one can embed OS into
B+(Slog) by means of a choice of small parameters, and then take the literal tensor prod-
uct, as described in [Falt], §2. In our situation, however, since we are given a Frobenius
lifting Φlog, the most useful point of view will be to embed
OS ↪→ B+(Slog)
OS into B+(Slog) by means of the Frobenius lifting Φlog. Indeed, the choice of Frobenius
lifting gives us an embedding of OS into the ring of Witt vectors that appears in the
construction (reviewed above) of B+(Slog). Then, we may regard the module considered
above as obtained via the literal tensor product with respect to this particular embedding
of OS into B+(Slog). At any rate, DS ˆ⊗OS B+(Slog) has a natural ﬁltration and Frobenius
action. Let Tlog → Slog be the ﬁnite covering deﬁned by Φ log.( T h u s ,Tlog ∼= Slog.) Then
DS ˆ⊗OS B+(Slog) also has a natural action by π1(Tlog
K ). The reason why we must restrict
to Tlog, rather than considering all ofπ1(Slog
K ), is that the way the Galois action is deﬁned
(see [Falt], §2) involves exponentiating the connection∇ DS , so in order for the exponential
series to converge, one must be in a situation where the connection acts in a suﬃciently
nilpotent fashion. For convenience, let us write Π
Tlog (respectively, ΠSlog )f o r π1(Tlog
K )
(respectively, π1(Slog
K )).
Let us recall the uniformizing Galois representation Pet (Deﬁnition 1.4 of Chapter
III) associated to the ordinary Frobenius lifting Φ log. Recall that Pet ﬁts into an exact
sequence of ΠTlog -modules
0 → Θet
Φ (1) →P et → Zp → 0
The space of splittings of this sequence then forms an aﬃne Zp-scheme, which is the
spectrum of some ring Aﬀ(P∨
et). More concretely, Aﬀ(P∨
et) is a polynomial ring overZp in
158

3g − 3+ r variables which is equipped with an action by ΠTlog . Moreover, the submodule
of polynomials of degree ≤ 1i sg i v e nb yP∨
et ↪→ Aﬀ(P∨
et). We shall refer to Aﬀ(P∨
et)a st h e
aﬃnization of P∨
et.
Note that Aﬀ( P∨
et) has a natural Π Tlog -invariant augmentation Aﬀ(P∨
et) → Fp.L e t
DGal
S be the p-adic completion of the PD-envelope of Aﬀ(P∨
et) at this augmentation. Thus,
DGal
S is equipped with a natural structure of Π Tlog -algebra, and, moreover, we have a
ΠTlog -invariant inclusion
P∨
et ↪→D Gal
S
In other words, DS may be identiﬁed with the ring of additive periods (of Deﬁnition 1.5
of Chapter III). On the other hand, since Pet is the Galois representation contravariantly
associated to Geo(DS), it follows that we have a morphism
Pet → Geo(DS)∨ ˆ⊗OS B+(Slog)
which respects the Hodge ﬁltrations, Frobenius actions (where Pη is endowed with the
trivial Hodge ﬁltration and Frobenius action), and Galois actions (by Π Tlog ). “Switching
duals,” we thus see that we have a morphism
Geo(DS) →P ∨
et ˆ⊗Zp B+(Slog) ↪→D Gal
S ˆ⊗Zp B+(Slog)
which respects Hodge, Frobenius, and Galois. Next, since Geo( DS) generates DS as a
“PD-polynomial algebra” with no relations, it thus follows that we obtain a morphism
DS →D Gal
S ˆ⊗Zp B+(Slog)
which respects Hodge, Frobenius, and Galois. Finally, tensoring withB+(Slog), we obtain
the following result:
Proposition 1.2. We have a morphism
DS ˆ⊗OS B+(Slog) →D Gal
S ˆ⊗Zp B+(Slog)
which respects Hodge ﬁltrations, Frobenius actions, and Galois actions (byΠTlog ).
The Crystalline-Induced Galois Representation
Let Ulog ⊆ Xlog be a small aﬃne open subset. Choose a Frobenius lifting Ψ log on
Ulog that is compatible with Φlog on Slog.T h u s , Ψlog gives us an embedding of OU into
B+(Ulog) which ﬁts into a commutative diagram
159

OS −→ B+(Slog)
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
OU −→ B+(Ulog)
We would like to consider
GU
def
= E∨
D ˆ⊗OU B+(Ulog)
where the “ ∨” denotes the dual as a DS-module. The problem is to show that GU has
enough Frobenius-invariant sections in the zeroth step of its ﬁltration. The reason that we
cannot apply the theory of [Falt], §2 directly is that the relevant theorem (Theorem 2.4
of loc. cit.) assumes a bound on the number of steps in the ﬁltration of the MF∇ -object
under consideration. On the other hand, ED has inﬁnitely many steps,
What we can do is base-change GU by the morphism of Proposition 1.2. We then
obtain a free (DGal
S ˆ⊗Zp B+(Ulog))-module
G′
U
of rank two. Moreover, G′
U is equipped with a Galois action, a Hodge ﬁltration, and a
Frobenius action
F∗((G′
U )F ) ∼= G′
U
(where the superscripted “ F” denotes base-change by the Frobenius onB+(Ulog)).
Proposition 1.3. The submodule
(F0(G′
U ))F=1
(consisting of Frobenius-invariant elements ofF0(G′
U ))f o r m saf r e eDGal
S -module EGal
U of
rank two.
Proof. The proof is entirely the same as that of Theorem 2.4 of [Falt], §2. The point
of base-changing by the morphism of Proposition 1.2 is that this enables us to replace
objects like E
∨
D whose Hodge ﬁltrations have inﬁnitely many steps by objects like G′
U
whose Hodge ﬁltration has essentially only two steps. In fact, over Tlog,t h er e l a t i v e
connection ∇ E on E actually extends to a full connection∇ ′ modulo p,s o( EFp , ∇ ′) deﬁnes
a Galois representation onto someFp-vector space E′ (⊆E ∨
Fp ⊗ B+(Ulog)Fp ) of dimension
two. Moreover, G′
U has a ﬁltration (deﬁned by taking divided powers of the augmentation
160

ideal of DGal
S → Fp) whose subquotients are tensor products of E∨
Fp ⊗ B+(Ulog)Fp with
symmetric powers of Ωet(−1)Fp . That is to say, we know that F0(−)F=1 for all of these
subquotients is as desired, so next we want to consider the issue of whether the various
extensions involved split over B+(Ulog). But this issue is precisely that discussed in the
p r o o fo fT h e o r e m2 . 4o f[ F a l t ] ,§2. Thus, we see that we have enough Frobenius invariants,
at least over the PD-completion of DGal
S . But it is a simple exercise to see that the fact that
the original Frobenius action is deﬁned over DGal
S (i.e., not just over the PD-completion
of DGal
S ) implies that the Frobenius invariants will also be deﬁned over DGal
S itself. This
completes the proof. ⃝
Let Xlog
T
def
= Xlog ×Slog Tlog. Similarly, we have Ulog
T ⊆ Xlog
T . Now we have a natural
π1((Ulog
T )K)-action on G′
U Since this action preserves the ﬁltration and commutes with
Frobenius, we thus get an action of π1((Ulog
T )K)o n EGal
U , which is compatible with mul-
tiplication by elements of DGal
S and the Π Tlog -action on DGal
S . Moreover, as we vary the
open subset U ⊆ X, the resulting EGal
U ’s are clearly compatible. Thus, they glue together
to form a π1((Xlog
T )K)-DGal
S -module
EGal
X
We state this as a Theorem:
Theorem 1.4. The crystalline-induced MF∇ -object
(ED;Fi(ED); ΦED ; ∇ ED )
of Theorem 1.1 has associated to it an (up to ±1) π1((Xlog
T )K)-DGal
S -module
EGal
X
which is a free DGal
S -module of rank two. We shall refer toEGal
X as the crystalline-induced
Galois representation associated to the induced MF∇ -object of Theorem 1.1.
Remark. Unlike the case of canonical curves, where one actually has a dual crystalline
representation (in the sense of [Falt],§2) into GL±
2 (Zp), in the case of noncanonical curves,
EGal
X is as close a p-adic analogue as one can get to the canonical representation in the
complex case. In the following subsection, we shall make the phrase “as close as one can
get” more precise.
161

Relation to the Canonical Aﬃne Coordinates
Let Tlog
∞ → Slog be the inverse limit of the coverings obtained by iterating Φlog.L e t
Xlog
T∞ → Tlog
∞ be the pull-back to Tlog
∞ of Xlog → Slog. Let us choose base-points once and
for all, and let
Π1
def
= π1((Xlog
T )K); Π ∞
def
= π1((Xlog
T∞ )K)
Thus, Π∞ ⊆ Π1 is a closed subgroup. In the preceding subsection, we constructed a DGal
S -
Π1-module which we calledEGal
X . If we restrict our Galois representations from Π1 to Π∞ ,
then we obtain a Π∞ -equivariant surjection
πS : DGal
S → Zp
whose kernel is theaugmentation ideal IGal
S , i.e., the PD-ideal generated by ΩGal
S
.T h u s ,i f
we base changeEGal
X by πS, we obtain a rank twoZp-module with a continuous Π∞ -action
which we denote by:
E0
def
= EGal
X ⊗DGal
S ,πS Zp
Thus, in summary,E0 has the advantage that it is of rank two overZp, but the disadvantage
that it only has a Π ∞ - (as opposed to a full Π 1-) action, while EGal
X has the advantage
that is has a natural Π1-action, but the disadvantage that it is of rank two over the rather
large ring of additive periods DGal
S . In this subsection, we show that the canonical aﬃne
coordinates (of Chapter III, Theorem 3.6) measure precisely the degree to which the Π ∞
action on E0 cannot be extended to a full action of Π1.
We begin with the following fundamental observation. Let Δ ⊆ Π∞ ⊆ Π1 be the
geometric fundamental group, i.e., the kernel of the natural morphism Π1 → π1(Tlog
K ). Let
us consider the exact sequence of Π∞ -modules
0 → E0 ⊗Zp IGal
S /(IGal
S )2 → EGal
X ⊗DGal
S
DGal
S /(IGal
S )2 → E0 → 0
By considering the underlying Δ-module structures, we obtain that the above exact se-
quence deﬁnes an extension class
ηGal ∈ H1(Δ ,Ad(E0)) ⊗Zp IGal
S /(IGal
S )2 = H1(Δ ,Ad(E0)) ⊗Zp ΩGal
S
which is ﬁxed by the natural action of π1((Tlog
∞ )K) on this cohomology group. On the
other hand, because our original indigenous bundle is ordinary, we see that we have a
π
1((Tlog
∞ )K)-equivariant inclusion
162

(ΩGal
S )∨ ↪→ H1(Δ ,Ad(E0))
Then we claim thatηGal is precisely the class inH1(Δ ,Ad(E0)) ⊗Zp ΩGal
S that corresponds
to this inclusion. Indeed, this follows immediately from observing that ηGal is essentially
the Galois version of the class ηE (the obstruction to the existence of a full connection on
E) that we encountered on our way to constructing ED. It then follows immediately from
the way one passes from MF∇ -objects to Galois representations that ηGal is the above
inclusion, as claimed. This observation concerning ηGal will be the fundamental “hard
fact” underlying what we do in this subsection; the rest will be general nonsense.
The general nonsense that we will use is the theory of [Schl]. Let us denote the
Π∞ -module E0 ⊗Zp Fp by (E0)Fp . Note that since over Tlog, the obstruction to putting
a full connection on EFp vanishes, so we get a genuine MF∇ -object (whose underlying
vector bundle is (ED ⊗D S/IS)Fp ) modulo p.T h u s ,t h e Π∞ -action on (E0)Fp extends to
a natural (dual crystalline) action of Π1 on (E0)Fp . We apply Schlessinger’s theory to the
functor on artinian rings B with residue ﬁeld Fp that assigns to such a ring B the set of
isomorphism classes of continuous representations of Δ on a free B-module EB of rank
two such that (EB) ⊗B Fp =( E0)Fp .S i n c eHi(Δ ,Ad((E0)Fp )) is zero if i ̸=1 ,a n do f
dimension 6g − 6+2 r over Fp if i = 1, it follows easily from [Schl] that this functor is
prorepresented by a formal scheme R over Zp.M o r e o v e r ,R is formally smooth over Zp,
of relative dimension 6g − 6+2 r.
Now we claim that there is a natural continuous action ofπ1((Tlog)K)o n R. Indeed,
let α ∈ Π1.S i n c eΔ⊆ Π1 is a normal subgroup, for any representation of Δ on some EB
as above, we obtain a new representation by conjugating elements of Δ by α,a n dt h e n
acting on EB in the original fashion. Since the original Δ-action on EB extends to a full
Π1-action on (EB) ⊗B Fp, it follows that this new representation is isomorphic to the old
after base change by B → Fp. Thus, the new representation deﬁnes a new B-valued point
of R. This deﬁnes an action of Π 1 on R which is clearly trivial on Δ ⊆ Π1.T h u s , w e
obtain a natural action of π1((Tlog)K)o n R.
Let us now turn to applying R to understanding the Π 1-module EGal
X .L e t ˆDGal
S be
the p-adic completion of DGal
S . The underlying Δ-module structure on EGal
X deﬁnes a
classifying morphism
κ : Spf( ˆDGal
S ) →R
(This is O.K. despite the fact that ˆDGal
S ⊗Zp Z/pNZ is not artinian, since Δ is topologically
ﬁnitely generated.) Let
σ0 : Spf(Zp) ↪→R
be the composite of Spf(πS)w i t hκ.L e tRPD be the p-adic completion of the PD-envelope
of R at σ0.L e t
163

κPD : Spf( ˆDGal
S ) →R PD
be the morphism induced byκ. Then the morphism induced byκPD on the Zariski tangent
spaces at σ0 is precisely the injection corresponding to the class ηGal considered above.
Thus, we have the following:
Lemma 1.5. The morphism κPD is a closed immersion of formal schemes.
Now let us consider the fact that the Δ-module structure onEGal
X actually comes from
aΠ 1-module structure which is DGal
S -semilinear (with respect to the Π 1-action on DGal
S
through π1(Tlog
K )). If we translate this statement by means of the functorial interpretation
of R, we obtain the following:
Lemma 1.6. The morphism κ is π1(Tlog
K )-equivariant with respect to the naturalπ1(Tlog
K )-
actions on ˆDGal
S and R.
Now let φ :Γ → π1(Tlog
K ) be a continuous homomorphism of topological groups. Let
1 → Δ → ΠΓ → Γ → 1
be the pull-back of the group extension
1 → Δ → Π1 → π1(Tlog
K ) → 1
by means of φ. Then one can consider the issue of whether or not the Δ-action on E0
extends to a continuous,Zp-linear action of ΠΓ on E0. Note that since H0(Δ ,Ad(E0)) = 0,
as long as we require that the associated determinant representation of ΠΓ is the cyclotomic
character, such an extension will always be unique (up to±1). On the other hand, by the
same reasoning as that used in Lemma 1.6, the Δ-action on E0 will extend to a ΠΓ-action
on E0 if and only if theZp-valued pointσ0 of R is ﬁxed by Γ (acting throughφ). Moreover,
by the preceding two lemmas, we see thatσ0 is ﬁxed by Γ if and only if theZp-valued point
of ˆDGal
S deﬁned by πS is stabilized by Γ. But this, in turn, is equivalent to the statement
that the restriction of the canonical extension classηΦ (discussed just before Deﬁnition 1.5
of Chapter III) becomes trivial when restricted to Γ.
Now let us suppose that (B, mB) is a local ring with residue ﬁeld k which is p-adically
complete, Zp-ﬂat, and has a topologically nilpotent PD-structure on mB. (Note that for
such a ringB,l o g:( 1 +mB) → mB and exp : mB → (1+ mB) deﬁne inverse isomorphisms.)
Let Γ′ = π1(Spf(B)K). Suppose further that
ψ : Spf(B) → S
164

is a morphism whose image avoids the divisor deﬁning the log structure on Slog.T h e nf o r
some closed subgroup Γ⊆ Γ′ of ﬁnite index, we have a morphismφ :Γ → π1(Tlog
K )w h i c hi s
compatible with the morphism induced on fundamental groups byψ. Recall from Chapter
III, Theorem 3.8, the canonical aﬃne coordinates corresponding to ψ. These coordinates
are valued in B (or, more precisely, in mB). Moreover, they are zero if and only if the
class ηΦ becomes zero when restricted to Γ ′. It is easy to see that ηΦ |Γ′ = 0 if and only
if ηΦ |Γ = 0. Also, we know from Chapter III that ψ corresponds to a canonical curve if
and only if the canonical aﬃne coordinates are zero. Thus, putting everything together,
we obtain the following result:
Theorem 1.7. The morphism ψ corresponds to a canonical curve if and only if the
Δ-action on E
0 extends to a Zp-linear, continuous action of ΠΓ on E0.
More generally, but less precisely, we see that:
(*) The canonical aﬃne coordinates in mB associated to ψ are a mea-
sure of the obstruction to extending the Δ-action on E0 to a Zp-linear,
continuous action of ΠΓ on E0.
Since the class ηΦ is “as nonzero as it can be” on Slog, we thus see that we have justiﬁed
the statement made at the end of the preceding subsection that the Π1-module EGal
X is “as
close as one can get” to extending the Δ-action on E0 to a full Π1-action.
Remark. In some sense, we can describe what we have done in this subsection as follows.
Consider the obstruction to extending the Δ-action on E0 to an action of Π Γ. A priori,
this obstruction is highly nonlinear and diﬃcult to get one’s hands on explicitly. Note that
this nonlinearity exists despite the fact that we already have a Π∞ -action on E0,a n dt h e
discrepancy between Π1 and Π∞ is “essentially” a linearZp-space of rank 3g−3+r.R a t h e r ,
the nonlinearity arises fundamentally from the fact that we are considering representations
into GL
±
2 , which is not an abelian (or even solvable) group. In particular, the moduli space
R of representations of Δ into GL ±
2 has no natural linear structure. Thus, the point of
constructing EGal
X and reinterpreting the existence of EGal
X in terms of R, as we have done
in this subsection, was tolinearize this obstruction by means of the uniformization of (the
relevant part of) RPD by means κPD.
Remark. For the reader interested in pursuing analogies with the complex case, we also
make the following observation. Since R is the local moduli space of deformations of the
canonical representation Δ → GL±
2 (Zp) of the geometric fundamental group, it is natural
to regard R as a sort of local p-adic analogue of the space RC of isomorphism classes of
representations of the geometric fundamental group into PSL 2(C) in the complex case.
Thus, RC has complex dimension 6 g − 6+2 r.I n s i d eRC, one has Fricke space RR,
with real dimension 6r − 6+2 r, corresponding to the representations into PSL2(R). In a
neighborhood of the canonical representation of a curve, RR maps diﬀeomorphically onto
165

Mg,r. Thus, one can regard the subspace Spf( ˆDGal
S ) ↪→R PD as analogous to Fricke space
RR ⊆R C in the complex case.
The Parabolic Case
Before proceeding, we pause to take a brief look at what happens for elliptic curves
(regarded parabolically). Although there are many similarities between the parabolic and
hyperbolic cases, there are also certain diﬀerences. This is not so surprising if one considers
the canonical representations arising from uniformizations in the complex case. Indeed,
in the complex context, for hyperbolic curves, the canonical representation of the funda-
mental group into PSL
2(R) is completely well-deﬁned up to conjugation by an element of
PSL2(R), while for elliptic curves, the morphism (induced by deck transformations on the
uniformization by C) gives a representation of the fundamental group into the group of
translations Ga(C) of the complex plane, but this representation is not well-deﬁned up to
conjugation by an element ofGa(C). Rather, there is an ambiguity of multiplication by a
complex number.
On the other hand, this same phenomenon of “lack of rigidity” ultimately is a con-
sequence of the overall linearity of the situation, which has positive aspects, as well. For
instance, one can carry out the construction of the inducedMF
∇ -object (Theorem 1.1) for
elliptic curves just as in the hyperbolic case. However, precisely because the obstruction
to deﬁning an MF
∇ -object is entirely linear from the outset, this approach is a sort of
overkill. Thus, in the following we propose to examine the obstruction to deﬁning a “full”
MF∇ -object (i.e., the same obstruction as the one we examined in the hyperbolic case)
directly, at the level of Galois representations, without resorting to the tool of crystalline
induction.
Thus, let us assume that f
log : Xlog → Slog is an ordinary zero pointed curve of
genus one such that the classifying morphism S → M1,0 is ´etale. Since the canonical
representation should be an extension of a rank one ´etale representation by its dual Tate
twisted once, we consider the local system R1(flog
K )et,∗Zp(1) on Slog
K . Let us denote the
ΠS
def
= π1(Slog
K )-module corresponding to this local system by H1. Then there exists a
rank one Π S-submodule E(1) ⊆ H1 such that the action of Π S on E is unramiﬁed, and
we have an exact sequence:
0 → E(1) → H1 → E∨ → 0
Suppose that E′ is an ´etale Π S-module such that ( E′)⊗2 = E∨. Then, the canonical
representation of the universal elliptic curve should be an extension of E′ by (E′)∨(1). If
we tensor the above exact sequence by E, we get an exact sequence of ΠS-modules
0 → E⊗2(1) → H1 ⊗ E → Zp → 0
Thus, the obstruction to the existence of such a canonical representation is precisely the
obstruction to lifting 1 ∈ Zp in the above exact sequence. This obstruction class lies in
166

H1(ΠS,E ⊗2(1))
and coincides with the classηΦ deﬁned by the canonical Frobenius lifting Φlog on Slog.T h a t
is to say, we end up with essentially the same conclusion as in the hyperbolic case: Namely,
that the obstruction to the existence of a “canonical representation” for the universal
ordinary elliptic curve (deﬁned on all ofπ
1(Xlog
K )) is given precisely by the classηΦ deﬁned
by the canonical Frobenius lifting.
§2. Canonical Objects Over the Stack of Multiplicative Periods
In this Section, we note that by working over the stack of multiplicative periods,w e
can construct all the objects that we are familiar with from the case of canonical curves.
The Stack of Multiplicative Periods
Let Slog =( N
ord
g,r )log.L e t Φlog be the canonical Frobenius lifting onSlog (as in Chapter
III, Theorem 2.8). If, for some N ≥ 1, we take the Nth iterate of Φlog,w eg e taﬁ n i t e ,ﬂ a t
covering
(Φlog)N : Slog → Slog
of Slog.L e tPlog be the inductive limit of these coverings (asN goes to inﬁnity). Let ˆPlog
be the p-adic completion of Plog.
Deﬁnition 2.1. We shall call Plog (respectively, ˆPlog)t h euniversal (respectively, com-
plete) stack of multiplicative periods.
Unlike the rings of additive periods considered earlier, which, roughly speaking, are gen-
erated by adjoining the logarithms of the multiplicative parameters to Zp, the structure
sheaf of the stack of multiplicative periods is obtained essentially by adjoining allp-power
roots of the multiplicative parameters to the structure sheaf of the original base scheme
(or stack).
More generally, let Tlog be a formal log scheme, whose underlying scheme T is p-
adically complete and ﬂat over Zp.L e t hlog : Y log → Tlog be an r-pointed stable curve
of genus g that arises from some classifying morphism Tlog → Slog. Then if we pull back
the morphism Plog → Slog via the classifying morphism Tlog → Slog for hlog, we obtain
an object
Plog
T → Tlog
167

over Tlog.L e t ˆPlog
T be the p-adic completion of Plog
T . We shall always assume that:
(*) The log structure of Tlog
Qp is trivial over an open dense set.
For instance, typicallyTlog will be the normalization ofZp in a ﬁnite ﬁeld extension of Qp
with a log structure that is trivial in characteristic zero.
Deﬁnition 2.2. We shall callPlog
T (respectively, ˆPlog
T )t h e(respectively, completed) formal
scheme of multiplicative periods associated to the curvehlog : Y log → Tlog.
Note that Plog
T depends on the choice of classifying morphism Tlog → Slog for the curve
that lifts the morphism Tlog → M
log
g,r deﬁned by the curve itself. That is, Plog
T depends on
a choice of quasiconformal equivalence class forhlog : Y log → Tlog.
Remark. Often in what follows we shall work in the universal case, that is, overSlog,a n d
thus obtain objects over Plog (or ˆPlog). However, one should always remember that the
objects constructed deﬁne (by restriction) objects over Plog
T (or ˆPlog
T ) for any r-pointed
stable curve of genus g over Tlog satisfying the hypotheses just stated.
The Canonical Log p-divisible Group
Let Slog =( Nord
g,r )log: that is, the locus of smooth ordinary curves (with a choice of
quasiconformal equivalence class). Thus, the log structure on Slog is trivial. Let flog :
Xlog → Slog be the universal curve. Let flog[N]: Xlog[N] → Slog be the pull-back of
flog by the Nth iterate of the canonical Frobenius. Thus, if we pull ( E, ∇ E) back to
Xlog[N] and reduce modulo pN , the obstruction to deﬁning a full connection (relative
to Xlog[N] → Spec(A)) vanishes, and so, we obtain an MF∇ -object, which we shall
call E[N]. Alternatively, this MF∇ -object can be obtained taking the MF∇ -object in
Theorem 1.1, pulling back to Xlog[N], reducing modulo pN , and then reducing modulo
IN
S . By [Falt], Theorem 7.1, away from the divisor at inﬁnity, and the method of Chapter
IV, §2 (following [Kato2]) at the divisor at inﬁnity, E[N] deﬁnes a ﬁnite, ﬂat log group
object G[N]o n Xlog[N]. Let Plog → Slog be the stack of multiplicative periods. Let
flog[∞ ]: Xlog[∞ ] → Plog be the pull-back of flog to Plog. Then by restricting from
Xlog[N]t o Xlog[∞ ] and then taking the inductive limit, we obtain an (up to ±1) log
p-divisible group
G[∞ ] = lim
−→
G[N]|Xlog[∞ ]
on Xlog[∞ ].
Deﬁnition 2.3. We shall call G[∞ ]t h ecanonical log p-divisible group on Xlog[∞ ].
168

If we invert p, and pass to p-adic Tate modules, then we obtain an ´etale local system of
Zp ⊕ Zp’s (up to ±1) on Xlog[∞ ]Qp . Now in the notation of §1, we have
Π∞ = π1(Xlog[∞ ]Qp )
Thus, the p-adic Tate module ofG[∞ ]Qp is given by the representation of Π∞ on E0 which
was discussed in §1. Let us denote this representation by
ρ∞ :Π ∞ → GL±(E0)
Deﬁnition 2.4. We shall call ρ∞ the canonical Galois representation ofΠ∞ .
Remark. If T is any p-adically complete formal scheme which isZp-ﬂat, and φ : T →N ord
g,r
is a morphism, then even though the canonical log p-divisible group and the canonical
Galois representation are not deﬁned until one goes up to the scheme of multiplicative
periods, one can nonetheless pull-back the canonical indigenous bundle (E, ∇
E)N on Nord
g,r
to obtain an indigenous bundle (E, ∇ E)T on Xlog
T → T. This indigenous bundle is deﬁned
over T, i.e., one needn’t pass to the scheme of multiplicative periods.
Deﬁnition 2.5. We shall call (E, ∇ E)T the canonical indigenous bundle on Xlog
T .
One should always remember that one only obtains the canonical indigenous bundle after
choosing a lifting φ : T →N ord
g,r (i.e., a quasiconformal equivalence class) of the classifying
morphism T →M g,r of the curve.
The Canonical Frobenius Lifting
We continue with the notation of the preceding subsection. It follows from Chapter
IV, Proposition 3.2, that the supersingular divisor D ⊆ XFp (where flog : Xlog → Slog
is the universal curve) is ´etale over SFp . We shall denote its complement in X,t h e
ordinary locus ofXlog,b yXord. Now it is immediate that the construction of the canonical
Frobenius lifting over the ordinary locus (preceding Theorem 1.6 of Chapter IV) carries
over immediately to the present case (where the base is S, as opposed to the ring of Witt
vectors with coeﬃcients in a perfect ﬁeld). Thus, if we denote base-change by Φ
log (the
canonical Frobenius) by means of a superscript “ F,” we obtain the universal analogue of
Theorem 1.6 of Chapter IV:
Theorem 2.6. There exists a unique ordinary Frobenius lifting (called canonical)
Φlog
X :( Xlog)ord → ((Xlog)ord)F
169

over the ordinary locus such that we get a horizontal morphismΦ∗
X EF →E which preserves
the Hodge ﬁltration.
Now let T be any p-adically complete formal scheme which isZp-ﬂat, and let φ : T →
Nord
g,r be a morphism. Let Xlog
T → T be the pull-back of the universal curve by φ.W r i t e
Xlog
TF for the pull-back of the universal curve by Φ ◦φ. Then by restricting the morphism
Φlog
X of Theorem 2.7, we obtain a T-morphism
Φlog
XT :( Xlog)ord
T → (Xlog)ord
TF
Thus, in the spirit of Deﬁnition 4.18 of Chapter IV, we make the following:
Deﬁnition 2.7. We shall call Xlog
TF the Frobenius conjugate curve to Xlog
T . We shall call
Φlog
XT the p-adic Green’s function of the curveXlog
T → T.
Next, we consider compactiﬁcations of this canonical Frobenius lifting. Let D[∞ ] ⊆
X[∞ ]Fp be the result of base-changing to ˆP.L e t D[∞ ] ⊆ ˆX[∞ ] be the respective p-adic
completions. Let ˆXD[∞ ] be the completion of ˆX[∞ ]a t D[∞ ]. Then just as in §3o f
Chapter IV, by looking at the universal deformation spaces of the canonical logp-divisible
group and its double Frobenius conjugate, we obtain an isomorphism
Ψ: ˆXDF2 [∞ ] ∼= ˆXD[∞ ]
Let ˆY [∞ ] → ˆX[∞ ] be the ﬁnite, ﬂat covering (of degree p + 1) parametrizing cyclic
subgroups (in the Drinfeldian sense) of the canonical log p-divisible group. Then, just as
before, there exists a divisor E ⊆ ˆY [∞ ]Fp that maps isomorphically onto D[∞ ]Fp .L e t
ˆYE[∞ ] be the completion of ˆY [∞ ]a t E. Then we obtain an embedding
(DE, RE): ˆYE[∞ ] → ˆXD[∞ ] ×ˆP
ˆXDF2 [∞ ]
The image of this embedding is a divisor, which, when restricted to the ordinary locus,
is equal to the union of the graph of the canonical Frobenius on ( Xlog)ord with its “Ψ-
transpose,” as in Chapter IV, §3 (see the discussion preceding Deﬁnition 3.3).
Deﬁnition 2.8. We shall call ˆY [∞ ] → ˆX[∞ ], together with Ψ and ( DE, RE)t h ecom-
pactiﬁcation of the canonical Frobenius lifting Φlog
X .
Thus, although the canonical Frobenius lifting Φlog
X is deﬁned over S (without passing to
the stack of multiplicative periods), the compactiﬁcation is only deﬁned over the completed
stack of multiplicative periods.
170

Bibliography
[Abikoﬀ] W. Abikoﬀ, The Real Analytic Theory of Teichm¨ uller Space, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 820,
Springer, 1980.
[AC] E. Arbarello and M. Cornalba, The Picard Groups of the Moduli Space of Curves, Topology26, No. 2
(1987), 153-171.
[BBM] P. Berthelot, L. Breen, and W. Messing, Th´eorie de Dieudonn´e cristalline II, Lecture Notes in Mathe-
matics 930, Springer, 1982.
[Bers] L. Bers, Uniformization by Beltrami Equations, Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 14 (1961), 215-228.
[BK] S. Bloch and K. Kato, L-Functions and Tamagawa Numbers inThe Grothendieck FestschriftI, Birkh¨auser
(1990), 333-400.
[EGA IV] A. Grothendieck and J. Dieudonn´e, ´El´ements de G´eometrie Alg´ebrique IV, Publ. Math. IHES32 (1967).
[Falt] G. Faltings, Crystalline Cohomology and p-adic Galois Representations,JAMI Conference, Johns Hop-
kins Univ. Press (1990), 25-79.
[Falt2] G. Faltings, Real Projective Structures on Riemann Surfaces, Compositio Mathematica 48, Fasc. 2
(1983), 223-269.
[Falt3] G. Faltings, Stable G-Bundles and Projective Connections, Journal of Algebraic Geometry 2, No. 3
(1993), 507-568.
[FK] H. Farkas and I. Kra, Riemann Surfaces, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 71, Springer, 1980.
[Gard] F. Gardiner, Teichm¨uller Theory and Quadratic Diﬀerentials, John Wiley and Sons, 1987.
[Gunning] R. C. Gunning, Special Coordinate Coverings of Riemann Surfaces, Math. Annalen 170 (1967), 67-86.
[Harts] R. Hartshorne, Residues and Duality, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 20, Springer, 1966.
[HM] J. Harris and D. Mumford, On the Kodaira Dimension of the Moduli Space of Curves, Inv. Math. 67
(1982), 23-86.
[Ih] Y. Ihara, Schwarzian Equations, Jour. Fac. Sci. Univ. Tokyo, Sect IA Math. 21 (1974), 97-118.
[Ih2] Y. Ihara, On the Diﬀerentials Associated to Congruence Relations and the Schwarzian Equations Deﬁn-
ing Uniformizations, Jour. Fac. Sci. Univ. Tokyo, Sect. IA Math. 21 (1974), 309-332.
[Ih3] Y. Ihara, On the Frobenius Correspondences of Algebraic Curves, in Algebraic Number Theory, papers
contributed for the International Symposium, Kyoto, 1976, Japan Soc. Prom. Sci., Tokyo, 1977.
[Ih4] Y. Ihara, Lifting Curves over Finite Fields Together with the Characteristic Correspondence Π + Π ′,
Jour. of Algebra 75, No. 2 (1982), 452-483.
[Jac] N. Jacobson, Lie Algebras, Interscience Tracts 10, John Wiley and Sons, 1962.
[Kato] K. Kato, Logarithmic Structures of Fontaine-Illusie, Proceedings of the First JAMI Conference, Johns-
Hopkins University Press (1990), pp. 191-224.
[Kato2] K. Kato, Logarithmic Degeneration and Dieudonn´e Theory, preprint.
[Katz] N. Katz, Nilpotent Connections and the Monodromy Theorem: Applications of a Result of Turritin,
Publ. Math. IHES 39 (1970), 355-412.
[Katz2] N. Katz, Algebraic Solutions of Diﬀerential Equations, Inv. Math. 18 (1972), 1-118.
[KM] N. Katz and B. Mazur, Arithmetic Moduli of Elliptic Curves , Annals of Mathematics Studies 108,
Princeton University Press, 1985.
171

[Lang] S. Lang, Introduction to Modular Forms, Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften 222, Springer,
1976.
[Lehto] O. Lehto, Univalent Functions and Teichm¨uller Spaces, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 109, Springer,
1987.
[Lehto2] O. Lehto, Quasiconformal Homeomorphisms and Beltrami Equations, inDiscrete Groups and Automor-
phic Functions, ed. W. J. Harvey, Academic Press (1977), 121-142.
[Marg] G. A. Margulis, Discrete Subgroups of Semisimple Lie Groups, Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer
Grenzgebiete 17, Springer, 1990.
[McM] C. McMullen, Rational Maps and Kleinian Groups, Proc. International Congress of MathematiciansII,
Kyoto (1990), 889-899.
[Mess] W. Messing, The Crystals Associated to Barsotti-Tate Groups; with Applications to Abelian Schemes,
Lecture Notes in Mathematics 264, Springer, 1972.
[Mzk] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of the Compactiﬁcation of the Hurwitz Scheme, Publ. of RIMS 31, No. 3
(1995), 355-441.
[Ogus] A. Ogus, F-Crystals, Griﬃths Transversality, and the Hodge Decomposition, Ast´erisque 221,S o c .M a t h .
de France, 1994.
[Royd] H. L. Royden, Intrinsic Metrics on Teichm¨uller Space, Proc. International Congress of Mathematicians
2, Vancouver (1974), 217-221.
[Schl] M. Schlessinger, Functors of Artin Rings, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.130 (1968), 208-222.
[Sesh] C. S. Seshadri, Fibr´es vectoriels sur les courbes alg´ebriques, Ast´erisque 96, Soc. Math. de France, 1982.
[SGA 1] A. Grothendieck et al., Revˆetements ´etales et groupe fondamental, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 224,
Springer, 1971.
[Shi] G. Shimura, Introduction to the Arithmetic Theory of Automorphic Forms, Publ. Math. Soc. of Japan
11, Iwanami Shoten and Princeton University Press, 1971.
[Tate] J. Tate, p-divisible Groups, Proceedings of a Conference on Local Fields, NUFFIC Summer School held
at Driebergen in 1966, Springer, 1967.
[Wolp] S. Wolpert, The Fenchel-Nielsen Deformation, Ann. Math. 115 (1982), 501-528.
[ZT] P. G. Zograf and L. A. Takhtadzhyan, On Uniformization of Riemann Surfaces and the Weil-Petersson
Metric on Teichm¨uller and Schottky Spaces, Math. USSR Sbornik 60, No. 2 (1988), 297-313.
172

Index
Terminology
Note: The data following each term indicate the chapter and section where the term ﬁrst
appears.
admissible compactiﬁed Frobenius lifting IV.4
admissible Frobenius lifting IV.4
admissible indigenous bundle II.2
associated Schwarz structure I.1
Beltrami diﬀerential Intro.1
Beltrami equation Intro.1
Bers embedding Intro.1
bianalytic constant I.1
function I.1
uniformizer I.1
biformal function I.1
canonical aﬃne parameter III.1
canonical bilinear form II.3, III.3
canonical class III.3
canonical (crystalline) Galois representation IV.1, V.2
canonical curve III.3
canonical Frobenius lifting (modular) III.2
canonical Frobenius lifting (on a curve) IV.1, V.2
canonical Galois extension class III.1
canonical height I.2
canonical indigenous bundle Intro.2, V.2
canonical lifting (point) III.1
canonical local Hecke correspondence, n
th IV.3
canonical local systems III.1, III.3
canonical log p-divisible group IV.2, V.2
canonical multiplicative parameter III.1, III.3
173

canonical p-divisible group III.1
canonical pseudo-Hecke correspondence, nth IV.3
canonical representation (complex case) Intro.1, Intro.2
canonical uniformization III.3
compactiﬁcation of a Frobenius lifting IV.4
compactiﬁcation of the canonical Frobenius lifting V.2
crystalline-induced Galois representation V.1
crystalline induction V.0
crystalline Schwarz structure I.1
with nilpotent monodromy I.1
diﬀerential local system III.1, III.3
dilatation Intro.1
divisor of marked points I.1
elliptic Riemann surface Intro.1
Fenchel-Nielsen coordinates Intro.1
ﬁnite type (Riemann surface of) Intro.1
FL-bundle II.1
Frobenius conjugate curve V.2
Frobenius lifting III.1
Frobenius on R
1f∗τXlog/Slog II.2
generic uniformization number II.3
global nth canonical Hecke correspondence IV.3
Green’s function (complex case) Intro.1
Green’s function, p-adic IV.4, V.2
Hasse invariant II.2, II.3
Hecke operators IV.3
Hecke type IV.3
height of a Frobenius lifting IV.4
Hilbert transformation Intro.1
174

Hodge section I.2
hyperbolic metric Intro.1
hyperbolic Riemann surface Intro.1
hyperbolic volume Intro.1
Igusa curve II.3
indigenous bundle Intro.2, I.2
of restrictable type I.2
indigenous section III.2
induced MF
∇ -object V.1
inﬁnitesimal Verschiebung II.2
intrinsic bundle I.2
Jacobson’s formula II.2
K¨ahler metrics and Frobenius liftings Intro.2
Kodaira-Spencer morphism I.1, I.2
local compactiﬁcation of a Frobenius lifting IV.4
local height of a Frobenius lifting IV.4
locally intrinsic bundle I.2
locally stable of dimension one I.1
log admissible covering III.2
log p-divisible group IV.2
marked I.1
MF
∇ -object II.2
naive compactiﬁcation of a Frobenius lifting IV.4
nilpotent indigenous bundle II.2
normalized P1-bundle with connection I.1
175

ordinary curve, hyperbolically II.3
parabolically II.3
ordinary Frobenius lifting III.1
ordinary indigenous bundle II.3
ordinary locus IV.1
p-curvature II.1
parabolic Riemann surface Intro.1
parabolic structure I.1
parabolic volume element Intro.1
partition curves Intro.1
pre-Schwarz structure I.1
pseudo-uniformizer I.1
quasiconformal equivalence class, p-adic III.3
quasiconformal function Intro.1
quasidisk Intro.1
real Riemann surface Intro.1
renormalized Frobenius pull-back III.2
ring of additive periods III.1
scheme of multiplicative periods V.2
Schwarz structure I.1
Schwarzian derivative I.1
Serre-Tate parameter IV.1
singular I.1
small aﬃne V.1
small parameters V.1
smooth and unmarked I.1
stable curve I.2
stack of multiplicative periods V.2
supersingular divisor II.2
176

tangential local system III.1, III.3
Teichm¨uller metric Intro.1
Teichm¨uller uniformization Intro.1
topological marking, p-adic III.3
totally degenerate curve I.3
trianalytic constant I.1
function I.1
triformal function I.1
uniformizing Galois representation III.1
uniformizing MF
∇ -object III.1
Verschiebung of an indigenous bundle II.2
on f∗(ωlog
X/S)⊗2(−D)I I . 2
morphism II.2
Weil-Petersson inner product Intro.1
Weil-Petersson metric Intro.1
Wolpert’s coordinates of degeneration Intro.1
Major Notation
A
Φ III.1
B Intro.1, II.3
Bμ III.3
B+(−)V . 1
C I.2, IV.4
(D, ∇ D)I I I . 2
ΔV . 1
D
E II.2
(DE, RE)V . 2
177

dS I.1
DS; IS V.1
DGal
S V.1
(Dy, Ry) IV.3
D0(a, b) IV.2
(ED, ∇ ED )V . 1
EE II.2
EGal
X V.1
(EN , ∇ EN )I I I . 2
ηΦ III.1
E0 V.1
F∗ II.2, III.2
Gg,r; GΔ II.3
Glog IV.2
GL± I.1
G[∞ ]V . 2
HE II.2
Hlog
Y IV.3
ht(Φ);ht x(Φ) IV.4
Hx IV.3
ι(a,b);0 IV.2
J I.1
κ V.1
κA III.1
κβ III.1, III.3
LS;L×
S I.1
Mg,r I.2, III.2
M
ord
g,r II.3
μ =( Δ,ϖ )I I I . 3
Ng,r II.2
N
ord
g,r II.3, III.2
Ωet
g,r II.3
Ωet
N III.3
Ωet
Φ III.1
Ωlog
S V.1
178

ω×
Ulog/Slog I.1
O#
U I.1
P II.1
(P,F ·(P), ∇ P, PΦ)I I I . 1
PE II.2
Pet III.1
ΦE IV.1, V.1
Φlog
N III.2
Φlog
X IV.1, V.2
Φω
E II.2
Φτ
E II.2
Π1;Π ∞ V.1
ϖ III.3
Plog V.2
ΨV . 2
Ψαβ III.1
Ψx IV.3
Q Intro.1
Qg,r II.2
qω,α III.3
qω,z II.1
qθ IV.1
ρ IV.1
ρ∞ V.2
S; S× I.1
Sg,r I.3
S
adm
g,r II.2
T II.1, IV.1
T 1/2 IV.1
Θ E II.2
Θet
g,r II.3
Θet
N III.3
Θet
Φ III.1
Θ F∗ III.2
Θ V
E II.2
Ubi I.1
ˆUbi I.1
Ucan III.1, III.3
179

Utr I.1
ˆUtr I.1
VE II.2
Vg,r II.2
Vμ,β III.3
X(a, b)ord IV.3
Xord;( Xlog)ord IV.1
X0(n) IV.2
180