Anabelian Geometry in the
Hodge-Arakelov Theory of Elliptic Curves
Shinichi Mochizuki （望月 新一）
RIMS, Kyoto University （京都大学数理解析研究所）
Abstract:
The purpose of the present manuscript is to survey some of the main ideas that
appear in recent research of the author on the topic of applyinganabelian geometry
to construct a“global multiplicative subspace”— i.e., an analogue of the well-known
(local) multiplicative subspace of the Tate module of a degenerating elliptic curve.
Such a global multiplicative subspace is necessary to apply theHodge-Arakelov the-
ory of elliptic curves ([Mzk1-5]; also cf. [Mzk6], [Mzk7] for a survey of this theory)
— i.e., a sort of “Hodge theory of elliptic curves” analogous to the classicalcomplex
and p-adic Hodge theories, but which exists in the global arithmetic framework of
Arakelov theory —t oo b t a i nr e s u l t si ndiophantine geometry. Unfortunately, since
this research is still in progress, the author is not able at the present time to give
a complete, polished treatment of this theory.
Contents:
§1. Multiplicative Subspaces and Hodge-Arakelov Theory
§2. Basepoints in Motion
§3. Anabelioids and Cores
§4. Holomorphic Structures and Commensurable Terminality
Section 1: Multiplicative Subspaces and Hodge-Arakelov Theory
At a technical level, the Hodge-Arakelov theory of elliptic curves may in some
sense be summarized as the arithmetic theory of the theta function
Θ=
∑
n∈Z
q
1
2 n2
· Un
and its logarithmic derivatives (U · ∂/∂U)rΘ. Here, we think of the elliptic curve
in question as the “complex analytic Tate curve”
Typeset by AMS-TEX
1

2 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI （望月 新一）
E
def
= C×/qZ
where q ∈ C× satisﬁes |q| < 1. Note that this representation of E as a quotient of
C× induces a natural exact sequence on the singular homologyof E:
0 → 2πi · Z = Hsing
1 (C×, Z) → Hsing
1 (E, Z) → Z → 0
We shall refer to the subspace Im(2πi · Z) ⊆ Hsing
1 (E, Z)a st h emultiplicative sub-
space of Hsing
1 (E, Z), and to the generator 1 ∈ Z (well-deﬁned up to multiplication
by ±1) of the quotient ofHsing
1 (E, Z) by the multiplicative subspace as thecanonical
generator of this quotient.
It is not diﬃcult to see that the multiplicative subspace and canonical gen-
erator constitute the essential data necessary to represent the theta function as a
series in q and U. Without this representation, it is extremely diﬃcult to perform
explicit calculations concerning Θ and its derivatives. Indeed, it is (practically)
no exaggeration to state that all the main results of Hodge-Arakelov theory are,
at some level, merely formal consequences of this series representation — i.e., of
the existence of the multiplicative subspace/canonical generator(and its arithmetic
analogues).
Since, ultimately, however, we wish to “do arithmetic,” it is necessary to be
able to consider the analogue of the above discussion in various arithmetic situa-
tions. The most basic arithmetic situation in which such an analogue exists is the
following. Write A
def
= Z[[q]] ⊗ Z Q[q−1]( w h e r eq is an indeterminate). Write
E
def
=‘ Gm/qZ’
for the Tate curve over A. Then the structure of E as a (rigid analytic) quotient
of Gm gives rise to an exact sequence
0 → μ d → E[d] → Z/dZ → 0
involving the group scheme E[d]( o v e rA)o f d-torsion points, for some integer
d ≥ 1. This exact sequence is a “ q-analytic” analogue of the complex analytic
exact sequence considered above. We shall refer to the image Im( μ d) ⊆ E[d]
(respectively, generator 1 ∈ Z/dZ, well-deﬁned up to multiplication by ±1) as the
multiplicative subspace (respectively, canonical generator)o f E[d].
Since much of the Hodge-Arakelov theory of elliptic curves deals with the
values of Θ and its derivatives on the d-torsion points, it is not surprising that
this multiplicative subspace/canonical generator play an important role in Hodge-
Arakelov theory, especially from the point of view of“eliminating Gaussian poles”
(cf. [Mzk2]; [Mzk6], §1.5.1).

ANABELIAN GEOMETRY IN HODGE-ARAKELOV THEORY 3
Note that by pulling back the objects constructed above over A,o n em a y
construct a multiplicative subspace/canonical generator for any Tate curve over
a p-adic local ﬁeld , e.g., a completion Fp of a number ﬁeld F at a ﬁnite prime
p. Ultimately, however, to apply Hodge-Arakelov theory to diophantine geometry,
it is necessary to construct a multiplicative subspace/canonical generator not just
over such local ﬁelds, but globally over a number ﬁeld . It turns out that this is a
highly nontrivial enterprise, which requires, in an essential way, the use ofanabelian
geometry, as will be described below.
Section 2: Basepoints in Motion
In this §,w el e t F be a number ﬁeld and consider an elliptic curve E over
G
def
=S p e c (F)w i t hbad, multiplicative reductionat a ﬁnite prime pG of F.W r i t e
N→ G
for the ﬁnite Galois ´etale covering of trivializations (Z/dZ)2 ∼
→ E[d] of the ﬁnite
´etale group scheme of d-torsion points E[d]; denote the ﬁnite ´ etale local system
determined by E[d]o v e rG (respectively, N)b y EG (respectively, EN ). Also, for
simplicity, weassume that N is connected(an assumption which holds, for instance,
whenever d is a power of a suﬃciently large prime number).
Note that there is a tautological trivialization (Z/dZ)2 ∼
→ E[d]o f E[d]o v e rN.
By applying this tautological trivialization to the elements “(1 , 0)” and “(0 , 1),”
respectively, we obtain — just as a matter of “general nonsense,” i.e., without
applying any diﬃcult results from anabelian geometry — a submodule/generator
(of the quotient by the submodule) of EN .N o w ,l e tu schoose ap r i m eo fN
p⊛
lying over pG with the property that this submodule/generator coincides with the
multiplicative subspace/canonical generator (cf. §1) at pG. (One veriﬁes easily that
such a p⊛ always exists.) Denote this data of submodule/generator of EN by:
L⊛,N ⊆E N ; γ⊛,N
Note that although the restricted data
L⊛,N |p⊛ ; γ⊛,N |p⊛
is (by construction) multiplicative/canonical at p⊛,a t “most” of the primes pN of
N lying over pG, the restricted data will not be multiplicative/canonical. Thus:

4 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI （望月 新一）
At ﬁrst glance, the goal of constructing a submodule/generator which
is “always multiplicative/canonical” globally over all of N appears to be
hopeless.
In fact, however, in the theory of [Mzk16], we wish to think about things in a
diﬀerent way from the “naive” approach just described.
Namely, in addition to the original (set-theoretic) universe
⊛
in which we have been working up until now — which we shall also often refer to as
the “base universe” — we would also like to consider another distinct, independent
universe in which “equivalent/analogous, but not equal ”objects are constructed.
This analogous, but distinct universe will be referred to as the reference universe:
⊚
The analogous objects belonging to the reference universe will be denoted by a
subscript ⊚: e.g., G⊚, N⊚,e t c .
Then instead of thinking of the primes
pN
of N which lie over pG as primes at which one is to restrict L⊛,N ; γ⊛,N to see
if they are canonical (i.e., multiplicative/canonical), we think of these points as
parametrizing the possible relationships between the N of the “original universe”
and the N⊚ of the “reference universe.” That is to say, assuming for the moment
that there is a canonical identiﬁcation between G and G⊚ —af a c tw h i c hi sn o t
obvious (or indeed true, without certain further assumptions — cf. Example 3.2 in
§3 below), but is, in fact, a highly nontrivial consequence of the methods introduced
in §3—t h e n pN parametrizes that particular relationship
“ α[pN ; p⊚]”
(well-deﬁned up to an ambiguity described by the action of the decomposition sub-
group in Gal(N/G) determined by pN ) between N, N⊚ that associates the prime
pN of N to the prime p⊚ of N⊚.M o r e o v e r :
Relative to the relationship “α[pN ; p⊚]” parametrized bypN , the data (sub-
module/generator) on N⊚ determined by L⊛,N |pN ; γ⊛,N |pN are multi-
plicative/canonical at the “basepoint”p⊚ of N⊚.

ANABELIAN GEOMETRY IN HODGE-ARAKELOV THEORY 5
In other words:
By allowing, in eﬀect, the “basepoint in question” to vary, we obtain
globally canonical data in the sense that L⊛,N |pN ; γ⊛,N |pN are always
canonical, relative to the basepoint parametrized by pN .
This is the reason why it is necesary to introduce the “reference universe”— i.e.,
in order to have an alternative arena in which to consider a “distinct, independent
basepoint”(i.e., p⊚) from the “original basepoint” p⊛ of N, relative to which the
data in question becomes canonical. Note that once one introduces a distinct,
independent reference universe, it is atautology — by essentially the same reasoning
as that of “Russell’s paradox” concerning the “set of all sets” — that all possible
relationships “ α[pN ; p⊚]” between these two universes do, in fact, occur.
We refer to the ﬁgure below for a pictorial representation of the situation just
described:
————————————————————————————————————
[N]
———
p⊛ : ↑ ... ↘
pN,⋏ ∥∥
pN,⋏⋏ ∥∥
pN,⋏⋏⋏ ∥∥
pN,⋏⋏⋏⋏ ∥∥
pN : ↘
||
||
||
| ⧸ |
| ⧸ |
| ⧸ |
| ⧸ |
||
||
[N
⊚]
———
↑ : p⊚
pN,⋎⋎⋎⋎⋎
pN,⋎⋎⋎⋎
pN,⋎⋎⋎
pN,⋎⋎
pN,⋎
————————————————————————————————————
In this depiction, the “ p’s” denote various primes in N, N⊚ lying over pG,
(pG)⊚; the arrows denote “directions” in EN , EN⊚ ; the arrow shown closest to a
“:” is to be understood to represent the multiplicative subspaceat the prime on the
other side of the “:”; the area set out on the left (respectively, right) is to be taken
to represent thebase universe(respectively,reference universe); the diagonal dotted

6 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI （望月 新一）
line between these two universes is to be taken to be the equivalence “ α[pN ; p⊚]”
discussed above; the “∥∥ ’s” are to be taken to representparallel transportof arrows
— which is possible since the local system EN is trivial,a n dN is connected.
On the other hand, once one introduces such a distinct, independent universe,
the task ofrelating events in the new universe in an orderly, consistent way to events
in the old becomes highly nontrivial. This is the role played by the introduction of
ideas motivated by anabelian geometry, to be described below in §3, 4.
Section 3: Anabelioids and Cores
A connected anabelioidis simply a Galois category (in the classical language of
[SGA1], Expos´e V). In general, we will also wish to consider arbitrary anabelioids,
which have ﬁnitely many connected components, each of which is a connected
anabelioid. Thus, in the language of [SGA1], Expos´ eV , §9, an anabelioid is a
multi-Galois category.
Thus, an anabelioid is a topos — hence, in particular, a (1-)category — sat-
isfying certain properties. Moreover, the ﬁnite set of connected components of an
anabelioid, as well as the connected anabelioid corresponding to each element of this
set, may be recovered entirely category-theoreticallyfrom the original anabelioid.
Suppose that we work in a universe ⊛ in which we are given a small category
of sets Ens.L e tG be a small proﬁnite group. Then the category
B(G)
of sets in Ens equipped with a continuous G-action is a connected anabelioid. In
fact, every connected anabelioid is equivalent to B(G)f o rs o m eG.
Another familiar example from scheme theory is the following. Let X be a
(small) connected locally noetherian scheme. Denote by
´Et(X)
the category whose objects are (small) ﬁnite ´etale coverings of X and whose mor-
phisms are X-morphisms of schemes. Then it is well-known (cf. [SGA1], Expos´ e
V,
§7) that ´Et(X) is a connected anabelioid.
Note that since an anabelioid is a 1-category, the “category of anabelioids”
naturally forms a 2-category. In particular, if G and H are proﬁnite groups, then
one veriﬁes easily that the (1-)category of morphisms
Mor(B(G), B(H))
is equivalent to the category whoseobjects are continuous homomorphisms of proﬁ-
nite groups ψ : G → H, and whose morphisms from an object ψ1 : G → H to

ANABELIAN GEOMETRY IN HODGE-ARAKELOV THEORY 7
an object ψ2 : G → H are the elements h ∈ H such that ψ2(g)= h · ψ1(g) · h−1,
∀g ∈ G.
At this point, the reader might wonderwhy the author felt the need to introduce
the terminology “anabelioid,” instead of using the term “multi-Galois category” of
[SGA1]. The main reason for the introduction of this terminology is that we wish
to emphasize that we would like to think of anabelioids X as generalized spaces—
which is natural since they are, after all, topoi — whose geometry just happens to
be “completely determined by their fundamental groups” (albeit somewhat tauto-
logically! — cf. the preceding paragraph). This is meant to recall the notion of an
anabelian variety, i.e., a variety whose geometry is determined by its fundamental
group. The point here is that:
The introduction of anabelioids allows us to work with both “algebro-
geometric anabelioids” (i.e., anabelioids arising as the “´Et(−)”o fa n( a n -
abelian) variety) and “abstract anabelioids” (i.e., those which do not nec-
essarily arise from an (anabelian) variety) as geometric objects on an
equal footing.
The reason that it is important to deal with “geometric objects” B(G) as opposed
to (proﬁnite) groups G,i st h a t :
We wish to study what happens as one varies the basepoint of one of
these geometric objects (cf. §2).
That is to say, groups are determined only once one ﬁxes a basepoint. Thus, it
is diﬃcult to describe what happens when one varies the basepoint solely in the
language of groups.
Next, we introduce some terminology, as follows: A morphism of connected
anabelioids
X→ Y
is ﬁnite ´etale if it is equivalent to a morphism of the form B(H) →B (G), induced
by applying “B(−)” to the natural injection of anopen subgroupH of G into G.A
morphism of anabelioids is ﬁnite ´etale if the induced morphisms from the various
connected components of the domain to the various connected components of the
range are all ﬁnite ´etale. A ﬁnite ´etale morphism of anabelioids is a covering if it
induces a surjection on connected components. A proﬁnite group G is slim if the
centralizer ZG(H) of any open subgroup H ⊆ G in G is trivial. An anabelioid X is
slim if the fundamental groupπ1(Xi) of every connected componentXi of X is slim.
A 2-category is slim if the automorphism group of every 1-arrow in the 2-category
is trivial.
In general, if C is a slim 2-category, we shall write
|C|

8 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI （望月 新一）
for the associated 1-category whose objects are objects of C and whose morphisms
are isomorphism classes of morphisms of C.
Finite ´etale morphisms of anabelioids are easiest to understand when the an-
abelioids in question are slim. Indeed, let X be a slim anabelioid. Write
Et(X)
for the 2-category whose objects are ﬁnite ´etale morphisms Y→X and whose
morphisms are ﬁnite ´etale arrows Y1 →Y 2 over X. Then the 2-category Et(X)i s
slim. Moreover, if we write ´Et(X)
def
= |Et(X)|, then the functor
FX : X→ ´Et(X)
S ↦→ (XS →X )
(where S is an object of X; XS denotes the category whose objects are arrows
T → S in X, and whose morphisms between T → S and T ′ → S are S-morphisms
T → T ′; XS →X is the natural “forgetful functor”) is an equivalence.
Next, let us write
Loc(X)
for the 2-categorywhose objects are anabelioids Y that admit a ﬁnite ´etale morphism
to X, and whose morphisms are ﬁnite ´etale morphisms Y1 →Y 2 (that do not
necessarily lie over X!). Then it follows from the assumption that X is slim that
Loc(X)i sa l s oslim.W r i t e :
Loc(X)
def
= |Loc(X)|
Perhaps the most fundamental notion underlying the theory of [Mzk16] is that
of a “core.” We shall say that a slim anabelioidX is a core if X is a terminal object
in the (1-)category Loc(X).
Here we make the important observation that thedeﬁnability of Loc(X)i so n e
of the most fundamental diﬀerences between the theory of ﬁnite ´ etale coverings
of anabelioids as presented in the present manuscript and the theory of ﬁnite ´etale
coverings from the point of view of“Galois categories,”as given in [SGA1]. Indeed,
from the point of view of the theory of [SGA1], it is only possible to consider
“ ´Et(X)” — i.e., ﬁnite ´etale coverings and morphisms that always lie over X.T h a t
is to say, in the context of the theory of [SGA1], it is not possible to consider
diagrams such as:

ANABELIAN GEOMETRY IN HODGE-ARAKELOV THEORY 9
Z
↙↘
XY
(where the arrows are ﬁnite ´ etale) that do not necessarily lie over any speciﬁc
geometric object, as is necessary for the deﬁnition of Loc(X). We shall refer to such
a diagram as a correspondenceor isogeny between X and Y.
Here, we wish to emphasize that the reason that cores play a key role in the
theory of [Mzk16] is that:
(Up to renaming) cores have essentially only one basepoint .
Indeed, this is essentially a formal consequence of the deﬁnition of a core. The
reason that this property of “having essentially only one basepoint” is important
is that it means that even if we consider (cf. the discussion of §2) distinct copies
of a core that belong to distinct, independent universes, we may still identify their
basepoints without fear of confusion or inconsistencies — such as “Russell’s para-
dox” concerning the “set of all sets.” That is to say, cores allow us to “navigate
between universes” without “getting lost.” We refer to this phenomenon as “an-
abelian navigation.”
Moreover, even for (slim) anabelioids that are not cores, we may still perform
a sort of anabelian navigation by “measuring the distance of such anabelioids from
a core.” Thus, even though for such non-cores, it is not possible tocompletely iden-
tify basepoints of copies of the object belonging to distinct, independent universes
without confusion (as in the case of cores), we can nevertheless identify basepoints
of copies of such non-cores up to a controllable ambiguity (cf. the “ α[pN ; p⊚]’s” of
§2), which is often suﬃcient for applications that we have in mind.
Finally, we close this § by presenting some examples of cores (and non-cores),
all of which are ofcentralimportance in the theory of [Mzk16]. Since these examples
involve schemes, in order to discuss them in an orderly fashion, it is necessary to
have a deﬁnition of “Loc( −)” for schemes, as well. LetX be a connected noetherian
regular scheme. Then let us write
Loc(X)
for the (1-)category whose objects are schemes Y that admit a ﬁnite ´etale morphism
to X, and whose morphisms are ﬁnite ´etale morphisms Y1 → Y2 (that do not
necessarily lie over X!).
Example 3.1. Number Fields. Perhaps the most basic example of a core is
the (slim) anabelioid

10 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI （望月 新一）
X
def
= ´Et(Q)
(where Q is the rational number ﬁeld; and ´Et(Q)
def
= ´Et(Spec(Q))). That X is a
core follows formally from: (i) the fact that Spec(Q) is a terminal object in Loc(Q);
(ii) the theorem of Neukirch-Uchida-Iwasawa-Ikeda (cf. [NSW], Chapter XII, §2)
on the anabelian nature of number ﬁelds. Note, on the other hand, that if F is a
number ﬁeld (i.e., ﬁnite extension of Q) which is not equal to Q,t h e n
´Et(F)
is not a core. Indeed, this follows (via the theorem of Neukirch-Uchida-Iwasawa-
Ikeda) from the easily veriﬁed fact that Spec( F)i s not a terminal object in the
category Loc(F).
Example 3.2. Non-arithmetic Hyperbolic Curves. Let K be a ﬁeld of
characteristic 0. Let XK be a hyperbolic curve over K (i.e., the complement of a
divisor of degree r in a smooth, proper, geometrically connected curve of genus g
over K, such that 2g − 2+ r> 0). In fact, more generally, one may takeXK to be a
hyperbolic orbicurveover K (i.e., the quotient in the sense of stacksof a hyperbolic
curve by the action of ﬁnite group, where we assume that the ﬁnite group actsfreely
on a dense open subscheme of the curve). Also, we assume that we have been given
an algebraic closure
 K of K and write X
K
def
= XK ⊗K
 K.
We will say that XK is a geometric core (cf. the term “hyperbolic core” of
[Mzk11], §3) if X
K is aterminal objectin Loc(X
K) (where, in the case of orbicurves,
we allow the objects of Loc(X
K) to be orbicurves that admit a ﬁnite ´etale morphism
to X
K). We will say that XK is arithmetic (cf. [Mzk11], §2) if it is isogenous to a
Shimura curve (i.e., some ﬁnite ´etale covering of XK is isomorphic to a ﬁnite ´etale
covering of a Shimura curve). As is shown in [Mzk11], §3, if XK is non-arithmetic,
then there exists a hyperbolic orbicurve ZK together with a ﬁnite ´etale morphism
XK → ZK such that ZK is a geometric core. Moreover, (cf. [Mzk11], Theorem B)
in the case of hyperbolic curves of type (g,r ), where 2g − 2+ r ≥ 3, a general curve
of that type is a geometric core.
Suppose that XK is a geometric core;a n dt h a tK is a number ﬁeld which is
a minimal ﬁeld of deﬁnition for XK. Then it follows formally from the theorem of
Neukirch-Uchida-Iwasawa-Ikeda(cf. Example 3.1), together with the“Grothendieck
Conjecture for algebraic curves” (cf. [Tama]; [Mzk13]; [Mzk15]) that the (slim)
anabelioid
´Et(XK)
is a core.
Example 3.3. Arithmetic Hyperbolic Curves. On the other hand, an
arithmetic curve XK (notation as in the last paragraph of Example 3.2) is never

ANABELIAN GEOMETRY IN HODGE-ARAKELOV THEORY 11
a geometric core. For instance, consider the hyperbolic orbicurve XK given by the
moduli stack of “hemi-elliptic orbicurves” (i.e., orbicurves obtained by forming the
quotient (in the sense of stacks) of an elliptic curve by the action of ±1). Then
the existence of the well-known Hecke correspondences on XK shows that X
K is
“far from being” a terminal object in Loc( X
K). Thus, in particular, the (slim)
anabelioid
´Et(XK)
will never be a core in this case.
Section 4: Holomorphic Structures and Commensurable T erminality
Sometimes, when considering the extent to which an anabelioid is a core, it is
natural not to consider all ﬁnite ´etale morphisms (as in the deﬁnition of Loc(−)),
but instead to restrict our attention to ﬁnite ´etale morphisms that preserve some
auxiliary structure. In some sense, the two main motivating examples of this phe-
nomenon are the following:
Example 4.1. Complex Holomorphic Structures. Let X be a hyperbolic
orbicurve (cf. Example 3.2) over the ﬁeld of complex numbers C.W r i t eXan for
the associated Riemann surface(or one-dimensional complex analytic stack). Then
we may consider the “complex analytic analogue”
X
def
= ´Etan(Xan)
of ´Et(X), namely, the category of local systems(in the complex topology) on Xan.
Just as in the case of anabelioids, one may consider ﬁnite ´ etale coverings of X,
hence also the category:
Loc(X)
On the other hand, it is easy to see that this category is “too big” to be of interest.
Instead, it is more natural to do the following: The well-known uniformization of
Xan by the upper half plane determines a homomorphism of the (usual topolog-
ical) fundamental group πtop
1 (Xan)o f Xan into PSL 2(R). This homomorphism
determines a local system of PSL 2(R)-torsors on Xan, hence an object QX ∈X .
Then, if we regard ﬁnite ´ etale coverings Y→X as always being equipped with
the auxiliary structure QY determined by pulling back QX to Y and then deﬁne
Lochol(X) to be the 2-category whose objects are such ( Y,Q Y) and whose mor-
phisms (Y1,Q Y1 ) → (Y2,Q Y2 ) are ﬁnite ´etale morphisms Y1 →Y 2 for which the

12 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI （望月 新一）
pull-back of QY2 is isomorphic to QY1 , then we obtain a slim 2-category Lochol(X)
whose associated 1-category
Lochol(X)
is easily seen to be isomorphic to Loc( X) (since the morphisms of Loc hol(X)a l -
ways arise from complex analytic morphisms of Riemann surfaces, which may be
algebrized). In particular, X is a geometric coreif and only if X is a terminal object
in Lochol(X).
Example 4.2. p-adic Holomorphic Structures. The analogue of Example
3.1 for Qp does not hold, since the (naive) analogue of the theorem of Neukirch-
Uchida-Iwasawa-Ikeda does not hold for ﬁnite extensions of Qp. On the other
hand, if K is a ﬁnite extension of Qp, then its absolute Galois group GK has a
natural action on Cp (the p-adic completion of the algebraic closure of Qp under
consideration). Moreover, although (unlike the case of number ﬁelds) it is not
necessarily the case that an arbitrary isomorphism GK1
∼
→ GK2 (where K1, K2 are
ﬁnite extensions of Qp) arises from a ﬁeld isomorphism K1
∼
→ K2,i t is necessarily
the case that such an isomorphism GK1
∼
→ GK2 arises from a ﬁeld isomorphism if
GK1
∼
→ GK2 is compatible with the natural actions of both sides on Cp (cf. the
theory of [Mzk14]). Thus, if one thinks ofCp as determining a (pro-ind-)object QK
in ´Et(K), and deﬁnes the morphisms of
Lochol(Qp)
to be morphisms ´Et(K1) → ´Et(K2)o f Loc(Qp) for which the pull-back of QK2 is
isomorphic to QK1 ,t h e n´Et(Qp) determines a terminal object in Lochol(Qp).
The above two examples motivate the following approach:L e t Q be a slim
anabelioid. Deﬁne a Q-holomorphic structure on a slim anabelioid X to be a mor-
phism X→ Q . We will refer to a slim anabelioid equipped with a Q-holomorphic
structure as a Q-anabelioid.A Q-holomorphic morphism (or “ Q-morphism” for
short) between Q-anabelioids is a morphism of anabelioids compatible with the
Q-holomorphic structures. Then we obtain a 2-category
LocQ(X)
whose objects are Q-anabelioids that admit a Q-holomorphic ﬁnite ´etale morphism
to X, and whose morphisms are arbitrary ﬁnite ´etale Q-morphisms (that do not
necessarily lie over X!).
Thus, instead of considering whether or not X is a(n) (absolute) core (as in
§3), one may instead consider whether or not X is a Q-core, i.e., determines a

ANABELIAN GEOMETRY IN HODGE-ARAKELOV THEORY 13
terminal object in LocQ(X)
def
= |LocQ(X)|. Just as cores “have essentially only one
basepoint”:
If X is a Q-core, then every basepoint of Q determines an essentially
unique (up to renaming) basepoint of X (so long as the Q-holomorphic
structures involved are held ﬁxed).
Thus, the theory of “ Q-holomorphic structures” gives rise to a sort of “relative
version” of theory of cores discussed in §3.
Next, we introduce some terminology, as follows. A closed subgroup H ⊆ G of
a proﬁnite group G will be called commensurably terminal if the commensurator
CG(H)
def
= {g ∈ G | (g · H · g−1)
⋂
H has ﬁnite index in H, g · H · g−1}
of H in G is equal to H itself. An arbitrary morphism of connected anabelioids
X→ Y will be called a π1-monomorphism (respectively, π1-epimorphism)i ft h e
induced morphism on fundamental groupsπ1(X) → π1(Y) is injective (respectively,
surjective). A π1-monomorphism X→ Y of connected anabelioids will be called
commensurably terminalif the induced morphism on fundamental groupsπ1(X) →
π1(Y) is commensurably terminal.
Now it is an easy, formal consequence of the deﬁnitions that:
Suppose that X is a Q-anabelioid with the property that the morphism
X→ Q deﬁning the Q-holomorphic structure is a π1-monomorphism.
Then X is a Q-core if and only ifX→ Q is commensurably terminal.
This observation allows to construct manyinteresting explicit examples of Q-cores,
as follows:
Example 4.3. p-adic Local Fields Revisited. Let F be a number ﬁeld,w i t h
absolute Galois group GF .L e t p be a ﬁnite prime of F, with associated decompo-
sition subgroup Gp ⊆ GF . Then the closed subgroup Gp ⊆ GF is commensurably
terminal (cf. [NSW], Corollary 12.1.3). In particular, in Example 4.2, instead of
considering the “holomorphic structure” determined by the action onCp,w ec o u l d
have considered instead the Q-holomorphic structure on ´Et(Qp), i.e., the holomor-
phic structure determined by the morphism
´Et(Qp) →Q
def
= ´Et(Q)
(arising from the morphism of schemes Spec(Qp) → Spec(Q)). Then ´Et(Qp) deter-
mines a Q-core, i.e., a terminal object in LocQ(´Et(Qp)).

14 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI （望月 新一）
Example 4.4. Hyperbolic Orbicurves over p-adic Local Fields. Let XK
be a hyperbolic orbicurve(cf. Example 3.2) over a ﬁeld K which is a ﬁnite extension
of Qp.S e tQ
def
= ´Et(Q), and equip X
def
= ´Et(XK)w i t ht h eQ-holomorphic structure
X→ Q determined by the morphism of schemes XK → Spec(Q). Then if XK is a
geometric coreand K is a minimal extension of Qp over which XK is deﬁned, then
it follows (cf. Example 3.2; [Mzk15]) that X determines a Q-core in LocQ(X).
Example 4.5. Inertia Groups of Marked Points. Let ˆΠg,r be the proﬁnite
completion of the fundamental group of a topological surface of genus g with r
punctures,w h e r e2g − 2+ r> 0. Suppose that r> 0, and let
I ⊆ ˆΠg,r
be the inertia group associated to one of the punctures. Then it is an easy exercise
to show that I ⊆ ˆΠg,r is commensurably terminal.
Example 4.6. Graphs of Groups. Suppose that we are given a (ﬁnite,
connected) graph of (proﬁnite) groups G.T h a t i s t o s a y , w e a r e g i v e n aﬁnite
connected graph Γ, together with, for each vertex v (respectively, edge e)o fΓa
proﬁnite group Πv (respectively, Πe), and, for each vertex v that abuts to an edge
e,a continuous injective homomorphism Πe → Πv. Denote by
ΠG
the proﬁnite fundamental group associated to this graph of proﬁnite groups. Then
we obtain natural injections Πe ↪→ ΠG,Π v ↪→ ΠG (well-deﬁned up to composition
with an inner automorphism of ΠG).
Now let Δ be a connected subgraphof Γ. Then “restricting” G to Δ gives rise
to a graph of groups GΔ . If we then denote the associated “Π GΔ ”b yΠ Δ ,t h e n
we obtain a natural continuous homomorphism Π Δ → ΠG. Then by constructing
various “ﬁnite ramiﬁed coverings” of G by gluing together compatible systems of
coverings at the various edges and vertices, one veriﬁes easily that:
(i) The homomorphism Π Δ → ΠG is injective.
(ii) Suppose that for each vertex v of Δ, their exists an inﬁnite closed sub-
group N ⊆ Πv with the property that for every edge e that meets v,a n d
every g ∈ Πv,w eh a v eΠe
⋂ (g · N · g−1)= {1}.T h e n ΠΔ is com-
mensurably terminal in Π G. In particular, for every vertex v of Δ, Π v is
commensurably terminal in ΠG.
The hypotheses of (ii) are satisﬁed, for instance, when all the Πe = {1} and all the
Πv are inﬁnite .

ANABELIAN GEOMETRY IN HODGE-ARAKELOV THEORY 15
Example 4.7. Stable Curves and Graphic Automorphisms. Let K be
an algebraically closed ﬁeld of characteristic 0. Let X be a stable hyperbolic curve
of type (g,r )o v e rK — i.e., the complement of the divisor of marked points in a
pointed stable curve of type (g,r )o v e rK.T h e nt oX, one may associate a natural
graph of groups GX as follows: The underlying graph Γ X of GX is the dual graph
of X. That is to say, the vertices (respectively, edges) of Γ X are the irreducible
components (respectively, nodes) of X, and an edge abuts to a vertex if and only
if the corresponding node is contained in the corresponding irreducible component.
If v (respectively, e)i sa vertex (respectively, edge)o fΓ X, then we associate to
it the proﬁnite group Π v (respectively, Π e) given by the algebraic fundamental
group of the irreducible component (respectively, inertia group (∼= ˆZ) of the node)
corresponding to v (respectively, e); the inclusions Πe ↪→ Πv are the natural ones.
Note that the proﬁnite fundamental group Π X associated to GX may be identiﬁed
with the algebraic fundamental group of X, hence is (noncanonically) isomorphic
to ˆΠg,r (cf. Example 4.5).
One veriﬁes easily that all of the Π e,Π v are commensurably terminal in ΠX
(cf. Examples 4.5, 4.6). Denote by
OutΓ(ΠX) ⊆ Out(ΠX)
def
= Aut(ΠX)/Inn(ΠX)
the subgroup of graphic outer automorphisms of ΠX. Here, an automorphism α :
ΠX
∼
→ ΠX is graphic if there exists an automorphism αΓ :Γ X
∼
→ ΓX such that: (i)
for every vertex v (respectively, edge e)o fΓ X, α(Πv) (respectively, α(Πe)) is equal
to a conjugate of ΠαΓ(v) (respectively, ΠαΓ(e)); (ii) the resulting outer isomorphism
Πv
∼
→ ΠαΓ(v) preserves the conjugacy classes of the inertia groups associated to the
punctures of X that lie on v, αΓ(v), respectively. Then it is not diﬃcult to show
by an argument involving “weights” as in [Mzk13], §1 – 5, that:
OutΓ(ΠX)i s commensurably terminal in Out(ΠX).
One may regard this fact as a sort of anabelian analogue of the well-known “linear
algebra fact” thatthe subgroup of upper triangular matrices inGLn(ˆZ) is commen-
surably terminal in GLn(ˆZ).
Bibliography
[Mzk1] S. Mochizuki, The Hodge-Arakelov Theory of Elliptic Curves: Global Discretiza-
tion of Local Hodge Theories, RIMS Preprint Nos. 1255, 1256 (October 1999).
[Mzk2] S. Mochizuki, The Scheme-Theoretic Theta Convolution, RIMS Preprint No.
1257 (October 1999).

16 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI （望月 新一）
[Mzk3] S. Mochizuki, Connections and Related Integral Structures on the Universal
Extension of an Elliptic Curve, RIMS Preprint No. 1279 (May 2000).
[Mzk4] S. Mochizuki, The Galois-Theoretic Kodaira-Spencer Morphism of an Elliptic
Curve, RIMS Preprint No. 1287 (July 2000).
[Mzk5] S. Mochizuki, The Hodge-Arakelov Theory of Elliptic Curves in Positive Char-
acteristic, RIMS Preprint No. 1298 (October 2000).
[Mzk6] S. Mochizuki, A Survey of the Hodge-Arakelov Theory of Elliptic Curves I, to
appear in“Moduli of Proﬁnite Aspects of Arithmetic Covers,”an AMS research
volume edited by M. Fried.
[Mzk7] S. Mochizuki, A Survey of the Hodge-Arakelov Theory of Elliptic Curves II ,
manuscript.
[Mzk9] S. Mochizuki, A Theory of Ordinary p-adic Curves, Publ. of RIMS 32 (1996),
pp. 957-1151.
[Mzk10] S. Mochizuki, Foundations of p-adic Teichm¨uller Theory, AMS/IP Studies
in Advanced Mathematics 11, American Mathematical Society/International
Press (1999).
[Mzk11] S. Mochizuki, Correspondences on Hyperbolic Curves, Journ. Pure Appl. Al-
gebra 131 (1998), pp. 227-244.
[Mzk12] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of the Compactiﬁcation of the Hurwitz Scheme,
Publ. of RIMS 31 (1995), pp. 355-441.
[Mzk13] S. Mochizuki, The Proﬁnite Grothendieck Conjecture for Closed Hyperbolic
Curves over Number Fields,J. Math. Sci., Univ. Tokyo 3 (1996), pp. 571-627.
[Mzk14] S. Mochizuki, A Version of the Grothendieck Conjecture forp-adic Local Fields,
The International Journal of Math. 8 (1997), pp. 499-506.
[Mzk15] S. Mochizuki, The Local Pro-p Anabelian Geometry of Curves, Invent. Math.
138 (1999), pp. 319-423.
[Mzk16] S. Mochizuki, Global Anabelian Geometry in the Hodge-Arakelov Theory of
Elliptic Curves, manuscript in preparation.
[NSW] J. Neukirch, A. Schmidt, K. Wingberg,Cohomology of number ﬁelds, Grundlehren
der Mathematischen Wissenschaften 323, Springer-Verlag (2000).
[SGA1] Revˆetement ´etales et groupe fondamental,S ´eminaire de G´eometrie Alg´ebrique
du Bois Marie 1960-1961 (SGA1), dirig´e par A. Grothendieck, augment´ed e
deux expos´es de M. Raynaud, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 224, Springer-
Verlag (1971).
[Tama] A. Tamagawa, The Grothendieck Conjecture for Aﬃne Curves, Compositio
Math. 109 (1997), pp. 135-194.