The Absolute Anabelian Geometry of Canonical Curves
Shinichi Mochizuki
Abstract. In this paper, we continue our study of the issue of the
extent to which a hyperbolic curve over a ﬁnite extension of the ﬁeld of
p-adic numbers is determined by the proﬁnite group structure of its ´etale
fundamental group. Our main results are that: (i) the theory of corre-
spondences of the curve — in particular, its arithmeticity — is completely
determined by its fundamental group; (ii) when the curve is a canonical
lifting in the sense of “p-adic Teichm¨uller theory”,its isomorphism class
is functorially determined by its fundamental group. Here, (i) is a conse-
quence of a “p-adic version of the Grothendieck Conjecture for algebraic
curves” proven by the author, while (ii) builds on a previous result to
the eﬀect that the logarithmic special ﬁber of the curve is functorially
determined by its fundamental group.
2000 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation: 14H25, 14H30
Keywords and Phrases: hyperbolic curve, ´etale fundamental group, an-
abelian, correspondences, Grothendieck Conjecture, canonical lifting, p-
adic Teichm¨uller theory
Contents:
§1. Serre-Tate Canonical Liftings
§2. Arithmetic Hyperbolic Curves
§3. Hyperbolically Ordinary Canonical Liftings
Introduction
Let X
K be a hyperbolic curve(cf. §0b e l o w )o v e raﬁeld K of characteristic
0. Denote its algebraic fundamental group by Π XK .T h u s ,w e h a v e anatural
surjection
ΠXK ↠ GK
Typeset by AMS-TEX

2 Shinichi Mochizuki
of ΠXK onto the absolute Galois group GK of K.W h e nK is a ﬁnite extension
of Q or Qp, and one holds GK ﬁxed, then it is known (cf. [Tama], [Mzk6]) that
one may recover the curve XK in a functorial fashion from ΠXK . This sort of
result may be thought of as a “relative result” (i.e., over GK).
In the present paper, we continue our study — begun in [Mzk7] — of
“absolute analogues” of such relative results. Since such absolute analogues
are well understood in the case where K is a ﬁnite extension of Q (cf. the
Introduction to [Mzk7]), we concentrate on thep-adic case.I nt h ep-adic case,
it is proven in [Mzk7] (cf. [Mzk7], Theorem 2.7) — by applying the work of
[Tama] and the techniques of [Mzk5]— that (if X
K has stable reduction, then)
the “logarithmic special ﬁber” of XK — i.e., the special ﬁber, equipped
with its natural “log structure” (cf. [Kato]), of the “stable model” of XK over
the ring of integers OK — may be recovered solely from the abstract proﬁnite
group ΠXK . This result prompts the question (cf. [Mzk7], Remark 2.7.3):
What other information — e.g., the isomorphism class of XK itself
— can be recovered from the proﬁnite group ΠXK ?
In this present paper, we givethree partial answersto this question (cf. [Mzk7],
Remark 2.7.3), all of which revolve around the central theme that:
When XK is, in some sense, “canonical”, there is a tendency for
substantial information concerningXK — e.g., its isomorphism class
— to be recoverable from ΠXK .
Perhaps this “tendency” should not be surprising, in light of the fact that in
some sense, a “canonical”curve is a curve which is“rigid”, i.e., has no moduli,
hence should be “determined” by its special ﬁber (cf. Remark 3.6.3).
Our three partial answers are the following:
(a) The property that the Jacobian of the XK be a Serre-Tate
canonical lifting is determined by ΠXK (Proposition 1.1).
(b) The theory of correspondencesof XK — in particular, whether
or not XK is “arithmetic” (cf. [Mzk3]) — is determined by Π XK (cf.
Theorem 2.4, Corollary 2.5).
(c) The property that XK be a canonical lifting in the sense of the
theory of [Mzk1] (cf. also [Mzk2]) is determined by Π XK ;m o r e o v e r ,
in this case, the isomorphism class of XK is also determined by ΠXK
(cf. Theorem 3.6).
At a technical level, (a) is entirely elementary; (b) is a formal consequence of
the “p-adic version of the Grothendieck Conjecture” proven in [Mzk6], Theorem

Canonical Cur ves 3
A; and (c) is derived as a consequence of the theory of [Mzk1], together with
[Mzk7], Theorem 2.7.
Finally, as a consequence of (c), we conclude (cf. Corollary 3.8) that theset
of points arising from curves over ﬁnite extensions of Qp whose isomorphism
classes are completely determined byΠXK forms a Zariski dense subset of the
moduli stack over Qp. This result (cf. Remark 3.6.2) constitutes the ﬁrst appli-
cation of the “p-adic Teichm¨uller theory” of [Mzk1], [Mzk2], to prove ahitherto
unknown result that can be stated without using the terminology, concepts, or
results of the theory of [Mzk1], [Mzk2]. Also, it shows that — unlike (a), (b)
which only yield “useful information” concerning X
K in “very rare cases” —
(c) may be applied to a “much larger class of XK” (cf. Remarks 1.1.1, 2.5.1,
3.6.1).
Acknowledgements: I would like to thank A. Tamagawa for useful comments
concerning earlier versions of this manuscript.

4 Shinichi Mochizuki
Section 0: Notations and Conventions
We will denote byN the set of natural numbers, by which we mean the set
of integers n ≥ 0. A number ﬁeld is deﬁned to be a ﬁnite extension of the ﬁeld
of rational numbers Q.
Suppose that g ≥ 0i sa n integer.T h e nafamily of curves of genus g
X → S
is deﬁned to be a smooth, proper, geometrically connected morphism X → S
whose geometric ﬁbers are curves of genus g.
Suppose that g, r ≥ 0a r eintegers such that 2g − 2+ r> 0. We shall
denote the moduli stack of r-pointed stable curves of genus g (where we as-
sume the points to be unordered)b y
 Mg,r (cf. [DM], [Knud] for an exposition
of the theory of such curves; strictly speaking, [Knud] treats the ﬁnite ´ etale
covering of
 Mg,r determined by ordering the marked points). The open sub-
stack Mg,r ⊆
 Mg,r of smooth curves will be referred to as the moduli stack of
smooth r-pointed stable curves of genus g or, alternatively, as themoduli stack
of hyperbolic curves of type (g,r ).
A family of hyperbolic curves of type (g,r )
X → S
is deﬁned to be a morphism which factors X↪ → Y → S as the composite of an
open immersion X↪ → Y onto the complementY \D of a relative divisorD ⊆ Y
which is ﬁnite ´etale overS of relative degreer, and a familyY → S of curves of
genus g. One checks easily that, ifS is normal, then the pair (Y,D )i sunique up
to canonical isomorphism. (Indeed, when S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld, this fact
is well-known from the elementary theory of algebraic curves. Next, we consider
an arbitrary connected normal S on which a prime l is invertible (which, by
Zariski localization, we may assume without loss of generality). Denote by
S
′ → S the ﬁnite ´etale covering parametrizing orderings of the marked points
and trivializations of the l-torsion points of the Jacobian of Y . Note that
S′ → S is independent of the choice of (Y,D ), since (by the normality of S) S′
may be constructed as thenormalization of S in the function ﬁeld of S′ (which
is independent of the choice of ( Y,D ) since the restriction of ( Y,D )t ot h e
generic point of S has already been shown to be unique). Thus, the uniqueness
of (Y,D ) follows by considering the classifying morphism (associated to (Y,D ))
from S′ to the ﬁnite ´etale covering of (Mg,r)Z[ 1
l ] parametrizing orderings of the
marked points and trivializations of the l-torsion points of the Jacobian [since
this covering is well-known to be a scheme, for l suﬃciently large].)
We shall refer to Y (respectively, D; D; D)a st h e compactiﬁcation (re-
spectively, divisor at inﬁnity ; divisor of cusps; divisor of marked points)o f X.

Canonical Cur ves 5
A family of hyperbolic curvesX → S is deﬁned to be a morphism X → S such
that the restriction of this morphism to each connected component of S is a
family of hyperbolic curves of type (g,r ) for some integers (g,r )a sa b o v e .

6 Shinichi Mochizuki
Section 1: Serre-T ate Canonical Liftings
In this §, we observe (cf. Proposition 1.1 below) that the issue of whether
or not the Jacobian of a p-adic hyperbolic curve is a Serre-Tate canonical
lifting is completely determined by the abstract proﬁnite group structure of its
arithmetic proﬁnite group.
Let p be a prime number. For i =1 , 2, let Ki be a ﬁnite extension of Qp,
and (Xi)Ki a proper hyperbolic curveover Ki whose associated stable curve has
stable reduction over OKi . Denote the resulting “stable model” of (Xi)Ki over
OKi by (Xi)OKi
.
Assume that we have chosen basepoints of the (Xi)Ki (which thus induce
basepoints of theKi) and suppose that we are given anisomorphism of proﬁnite
groups Π(X1)K1
∼→ Π(X2)K2
, which (by [Mzk7], Lemmas 1.1.4, 1.1.5) induces a
commutative diagram:
Π(X1)K1
∼
→ Π(X2)K2
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐
↓
G
K1
∼
→ GK2
Proposition 1.1. (Group-Theoreticity of Serre-T ate Canonical Lift-
ings) The Jacobian of (X1)K1 is Serre-Tate canonical if and only if the same
is true of the Jacobian of (X2)K2 .
Proof. Indeed, this follows from the fact that the Jacobian of ( Xi)Ki is a
Serre-Tate canonical lifting if and only if its p-adic Tate module splits (as a
GKi-module) into a direct sum of an unramiﬁed GKi -module and the Cartier
dual of an unramiﬁed GKi -module (cf. [Mess], Chapter V: proof of Theorem
3.3, Theorem 2.3.6; [Mess], Appendix: Corollary 2.3, Proposition 2.5). ⃝
Remark 1.1.1. As is shown in [DO] (cf. also [OS]), for p> 2, g ≥ 4, the
Serre-Tate canonical lifting of the Jacobian of a general proper curve of genus
g in characteristic p is not a Jacobian. Thus, in some sense, one expects that:
There are not so many curves to which Proposition 1.1 may be applied.
From another point of view, if there exist inﬁnitely many Jacobians of a given
genus g over ﬁnite extensions of Qp which are Serre-Tate canonical liftings,
then one expects — cf. the “Andr´e-Oort Conjecture”([Edix], Conjecture 1.3)
— that every irreducible component of the Zariski closure of the resulting set of
points in the moduli stack of principally polarized abelian varieties should be a

Canonical Cur ves 7
“subvariety of Hodge type”. Moreover, one expects that the intersection of such
a subvariety with the Torelli locus (i.e., locus of Jacobians) in the moduli stack
of principally polarized abelian varieties should typically be “rather small”.
Thus, from this point of view as well, one expects that Proposition 1.1 should
not be applicableto the “overwhelming majority” of curves of genus g ≥ 2.

8 Shinichi Mochizuki
Section 2: Arithmetic Hyperbolic Curves
In this §, we show (cf. Theorem 2.4 below) that the theory of correspon-
dences (cf. [Mzk3]) of a p-adic hyperbolic curve is completely determined by
the abstract proﬁnite group structure of its arithmetic proﬁnite group.W eb e -
gin by reviewing and extending thetheory of [Mzk3], as it will be needed in the
discussion of the present §.
Let X be a normal connected algebraic stackwhich is generically “scheme-
like”(i.e., admits an open dense algebraic substack isomorphic to a scheme).
Then we shall denote by
Loc(X)
the category whose objects are (necessarily generically scheme-like) algebraic
stacks Y that admit a ﬁnite ´etale morphism to X, and whose morphisms are
ﬁnite ´etale morphisms of stacks Y1 → Y2 (that do not necessarily lie over X!).
Note that since these stacks aregenerically scheme-like, it makes sense to speak
of the (1-)category of such objects (so long as our morphisms are ﬁnite ´etale),
i.e., there is no need to work with 2-categories.
Given an object Y of Loc(X), let us denote by
Loc(X)Y
the category whose objects are morphisms Z → Y in Loc(X), and whose mor-
phisms, from an object Z1 → Y to an object Z2 → Y , are the morphisms
Z1 → Z2 over Y in Loc(X). Thus, by considering maximal nontrivial de-
compositions of the terminal object of Loc(X)Y into a coproduct of nonempty
objects of Loc( X)Y , we conclude that the set of connected components of Y
may be recovered — functorially! —f r o mt h ecategory structure of Loc(Y ).
Finally, let us observe that Loc(X)Y may be identiﬁed with the category
´Et(Y )
of ﬁnite ´etale coverings of Y (and Y -morphisms).
We would also like to consider the category
Loc(X)
whose objects are generically scheme-like algebraic stacks which arise as ﬁnite
´etale quotients (in the sense of stacks!) of objects in Loc( X), and whose mor-
phisms are ﬁnite ´etale morphisms of algebraic stacks. Note that
 Loc(X)m a y

Canonical Cur ves 9
be constructed entirely category-theoreticallyfrom Loc(X) by considering the
“category of objects of Loc(X) equipped with a (ﬁnite ´etale) equivalence rela-
tion”.(We leave it to the reader to write out the routine details.)
Deﬁnition 2.1.
(i) X will be called arithmetic if
 Loc(X) does not admit a terminal object.
(ii) X will be called a(n)(absolute) coreif X is a terminal object in Loc(X).
(ii) X will be said to admit a(n) (absolute) core if there exists a terminal
object Z in
 Loc(X). In this case,
 Loc(X)=
 Loc(Z), so we shall say that Z is
a core.
Remark 2.1.1. Let k be a ﬁeld .I f X is a geometrically normal, geometrically
connected algebraic stack of ﬁnite type over k, then we shall write
Lock(X);
 Lock(X)
for the categories obtained as above, except that we assume all the morphisms
to bek-morphisms. Also, we shall say thatX is k-arithmetic,o rarithmetic over
k (respectively, a k-core,o r core over k), if
 Lock(X) does not admit a terminal
object (respectively, X is a terminal object in Loc k(X)). On the other hand,
when k is ﬁxed, and the entire discussion “takes place over k”, then we shall
often omit the “ k-” from this terminology.
Remark 2.1.2. Thus, when k = C, a hyperbolic curve X is k-arithmetic
if and only if it is arithmetic in the sense of [Mzk3], §2. (Indeed, if X is
non-arithmetic in the sense of [Mzk3], §2, then a terminal object in
 Lock(X)
— i.e., a “(hyperbolic) core” — is constructed in [Mzk3], §3, so X is non-k-
arithmetic. Conversely, if X is arithmetic in the sense of [Mzk3], §2, then (cf.
[Mzk3], Deﬁnition 2.1, Theorem 2.5) it corresponds to a fuchsian group Γ ⊆
SL2(R)/{±1} which has inﬁnite index in its commensurator CSL2(R)/{±1}(Γ)
— a fact which precludes the existence of a k-core.) Moreover, issues over an
arbitrary algebraically closed k of characteristic zero may always be resolved
over C, by Proposition 2.3, (ii), below.
Remark 2.1.3. If we arbitrarily choose a ﬁnite ´etale structure morphism to
X for every object of Loc(X), then one veriﬁes easily that every morphism of
Loc(X) factors as the composite of an isomorphism (not necessarily over X!)
with a (ﬁnite ´etale) morphism over X (i.e., relative to these arbtirary choices).
A similar statement holds for Lock(X).

10 Shinichi Mochizuki
Deﬁnition 2.2. Let X be a smooth, geometrically connected, generically
scheme-like algebraic stack of ﬁnite type over a ﬁeld k of characteristic zero.
(i) We shall say that X is an orbicurve if it is of dimension 1.
(ii) We shall say thatX is a hyperbolic orbicurveif it is an orbicurve which
admits a compactiﬁcation X↪ →
 X (necessarily unique!) by a proper orbicurve
X over k such that if we denote the reduced divisor
X\X by D ⊆
 X,t h e n
X is
scheme-like near D, and, moreover, the line bundleω
X/ k(D)o n
 X has positive
degree.
Proposition 2.3. (Independence of the Base Field)
(i) Let ksep be a separable closure of k; X a geometrically normal, geo-
metrically connected algebraic stack of ﬁnite type over k.T h e nX is a k-core
(respectively,k-arithmetic) if and only if Xksep
def
= X ×k ksep is a ksep-core (re-
spectively, ksep-arithmetic). Moreover, if Xksep admits a ﬁnite ´etale morphism
Xksep → Zksep to a ksep-core Zksep ,t h e nZksep descends uniquely to a k-core Z
of X.
(ii) Suppose thatk is algebraically closed of characteristic0, and that X is
a hyperbolic orbicurve. Next, let k′ be an algebraically closed ﬁeld containing
k. Then the natural functors
Lock(X) → Lock′(X ⊗k k′);
 Lock(X) →
 Lock′ (X ⊗k k′)
(given by tensoring overk with k′)a r eequivalences of categories. In particu-
lar, X is a k-core (respectively,k-arithmetic) if and only ifX ⊗k k′ is a k′-core
(respectively, k′-arithmetic).
Proof. First, we observe that (i) is a formal consequence of the deﬁnitions. As
for (ii), let us observe ﬁrst that it suﬃces to verify the asserted equivalences of
categories. These equivalences, in turn, are formal consequences of the following
two assertions (cf. Remark 2.1.3):
(a) The natural functor ´Et(X) → ´Et(X ⊗k k′) is an equivalence of
categories.
(b) If Y1, Y2 are ﬁnite ´etale over X,t h e n
Isomk(Y1,Y2) → Isomk′ (Y1 ⊗k k′,Y2 ⊗k k′)
is bijective.
The proofs of these two assertions is an exercise in elementary algebraic geom-
etry, involving the following well-known techniques:

Canonical Cur ves 11
(1) descending the necessary diagrams of ﬁnite ´etale morphisms over
k′ to a subﬁeld K ⊆ k′ which is ﬁnitely generated over k;
(2) extending orbicurves over K to orbicurves over some k-variety
V with function ﬁeld K;
(3) specializing orbicurves over V to closed (i.e., k-valued) points v
of V ;
(4) base-changing orbicurves over V to formal completions ˆVv of V
at closed points v;
(5) deforming (log) ´etale morphisms of orbicurves over v to mor-
phisms over the completions ˆVv;
(6) algebrizing such deformed morphisms (when the orbicurves in-
volved are proper).
This “elementary exercise” is carried out (for assertion (a) above) in the case
when X itself is proper in [SGA1], Expos´e X, Theorem 3.8. When X is an
arbitrary orbicurve as in the statement of (ii), thesame arguments— centering
around the rigidity of (log) ´etale morphisms under inﬁnitesimal deformations
— may be used, by considering compactiﬁcations (
X,D )o f X as in Deﬁnition
2.2, (ii), and replacing “´etale” by“´etale away from D”. Note that we use the
assumption that k is of characteristic zero here to ensure that all ramiﬁcation
is tame.
Finally, assertion (b) may be deduced by similar arguments — by applying,
in (5) above, the fact (cf. Deﬁnition 2.2, (ii)) that, if
 Y →
 X is any ﬁnite
morphism of orbicurves over k,t h e n
H0(
Y,ω ∨
X/k (−D)|
Y )=0
(where “ ∨” denotes the O
X-dual) in place of the rigidity of (log) ´etale mor-
phisms used to prove assertion (a). ⃝
Next, for i =1 , 2, let Ki be a ﬁnite extension of Qp (where p is a prime
number); let (Xi)Ki be a hyperbolic curveover Ki. Assume that we have chosen
basepoints of the (Xi)Ki , which thus induce basepoints/algebraic closures
 Ki
of the Ki and determine fundamental groups Π(Xi)Ki
def
= π1((Xi)Ki )a n dGalois
groups GKi
def= Gal(
Ki/Ki). Thus, for i =1 , 2, we have an exact sequence:
1 → Δ Xi → Π(Xi)Ki
→ GKi → 1
(where Δ Xi ⊆ Π(Xi)Ki
is deﬁned so as to make the sequence exact). Here, we
shall think of GKi as a quotient of Π(Xi)Ki
(i.e., not as an independent group

12 Shinichi Mochizuki
to which Π (Xi)Ki
happens to surject). By [Mzk7], Lemmas 1.1.4, 1.1.5, this
quotient is characteristic, i.e., it is completely determined by the structure of
Π(Xi)Ki
as a proﬁnite group.
Theorem 2.4. (Group-Theoreticity of Correspondences) Any iso-
morphism α :Π (X1)K1
∼→ Π(X2)K2
induces equivalences of categories:
Loc
K1
((X1)
K1
) ∼→ Loc
K2
((X2)
K2
);
 Loc
K1
((X1)
K1
) ∼→
 Loc
K2
((X2)
K2
)
in a fashion that is functorial in α.
Proof. Since
 Loc
Ki
((Xi)
Ki
)m a yb e reconstructed “category-theoretically”
from Loc
 Ki
((Xi)
Ki
) (cf. the discussion at the beginning of the present §),
in order to prove Theorem 2.4, it thus suﬃces to show that the isomorphismα
induces an equivalence between the categories Loc
Ki
((Xi)
Ki
).
Clearly, the class ofobjects of Loc
Ki
((Xi)
K i
) may be reconstructed as the
class of objects of the category of ﬁnite sets with continuous Δ Xi -action. To
reconstruct the morphisms, it suﬃces (cf. Remark 2.1.3) to show that given
any two open subgroups H1,J1 ⊆ Π(X1)K1
— which we may assume, without
loss of generality, to surject onto GK1 — and an isomorphism
H1
∼→ J1
that arises “ K1-geometrically”(i.e., from a K1-scheme-theoretic isomorphism
between the curves corresponding toH1, J1), it is necessarily the case that the
corresponding isomorphism
H2
∼
→ J2
between open subgroups H2,J2 ⊆ Π(X2)K2
arises K2-geometrically.
But this follows formally from the “ p-adic version of the Grothendieck
Conjecture” proven in [Mzk6], Theorem A: Indeed, H1
∼
→ J1 necessarily lies
over an inner automorphism γ1 : GK1
∼
→ GK1 .I n p a r t i c u l a r ,H2
∼
→ J2 lies
over an isomorphism γ2 : GK2
∼→ GK2 , which is obtained by conjugatingγ1 by
some ﬁxed isomorphism (not necessarily geometric!) arising from α between
the characteristic quotients GK1
∼→ GK2 . Since the property of “being an inner
automorphism” ismanifestly intrinsic, we thus conclude thatγ2 is also an inner
automorphism. This allows us to apply [Mzk6], Theorem A, which implies that
H2
∼→ J2 arises K2-geometrically, as desired. ⃝
Corollary 2.5. (Consequences for Cores and Arithmeticity) Let
α :Π (X1)K1
∼
→ Π(X2)K2

Canonical Cur ves 13
be an isomorphism. Then:
(i) (X1)
K1
is
 K1-arithmetic (respectively, a
 K1-core)i fa n do n l yi f
(X2)
K2
is
 K2-arithmetic (respectively, a
 K2-core).
(ii) Suppose that, for i =1 , 2, we are given a ﬁnite ´ etale morphism
(Xi)Ki → (Zi)Ki to a Ki-core (Zi)Ki . Then the isomorphism α extends
uniquely to an isomorphism Π(Z1)K1
∼
→ Π(Z2)K2
.
Proof. Assertion (i) is a formal consequence of Theorem 2.4 and Deﬁnition 2.1
(cf. also Remark 2.1.1). In light of Proposition 2.3, (i), assertion (ii) is a formal
consequence of Theorem 2.4, at least over some corresponding ﬁnite Galois
extensions K
′
1, K′
2 of K1, K2. That the resulting extension Π(Z1)K′
1
∼
→ Π(Z2)K′
2
of α is unique is a formal consequence of the fact that every open subgroup of
Π(Xi)Ki
has trivial centralizer in Π(Zi)Ki
(cf. [Mzk7], Lemma 1.3.1, Corollary
1.3.3). Moreover, it follows formally from this triviality of centralizers that,
by choosing corresponding normal open subgroups Hi ⊆ Π(Zi)Ki
such that
Hi ⊆ ΠXK′
i
,w em a yt h i n ko fΠ(Zi)Ki
(and its various open subgroups) as
subgroups of Aut(Hi), in a fashion which is compatible with α and its various
(unique) extensions. Thus, since Π (Zi)Ki
is generated by Π(Zi)K′
i
and Π(Xi)Ki
,
we conclude that this extension Π (Zi)K′
1
∼→ Π(Zi)K′
2
over the K′
i descends to
some Π(Z1)K1
∼→ Π(Z2)K2
, as desired. ⃝
Remark 2.5.1. Recall from the theory of [Mzk3] (cf. Remark 2.1.2; Propo-
sition 2.3, (ii), of the discussion above) that (Xi)
Ki
is arithmetic if and only if
it admits a ﬁnite ´etale cover which is a ﬁnite ´etale cover of a Shimura curve,
i.e., (equivalently) if there exists a Shimura curve in
Loc
Ki((Xi)
Ki
). As is dis-
cussed in [Mzk3], Theorem 2.6, a theorem of Takeuchi states that for a given
(g,r ), there are only ﬁnitely many isomorphism classes of hyperbolic curves of
type (g,r ) (over a given algebraically closed ﬁeld of characteristic zero) which
are arithmetic. Moreover, a general hyperbolic curve of type ( g,r ) is not only
non-arithmetic; it is, in fact, equal to its own hyperbolic core(cf. [Mzk3], The-
orem 5.3). Thus, for general curves of a given type ( g,r ), the structure of the
category
 Loc((Xi)
Ki
)i s not suﬃcient to determine the isomorphism class of
the curve. It is not clear to the author at the time of writing whether or not, in
the case when (X
i)Ki is arithmetic, the structure of the category
 Loc((Xi)
K i
)
is suﬃcient to determine the isomorphism class of ( Xi)Ki . At any rate, just
as was the case with Proposition 1.1 (cf. Remark 1.1.1), Theorem 2.4 does
not allow one to recover the isomorphism class of(Xi)Ki for “most” (Xi)Ki —
where here we take “most” to mean that (at least for ( g,r ) suﬃciently large)
the set of points determined by the curves for which itis possible to recover the
isomorphism class of (Xi)Ki from the proﬁnite group ( Xi)Ki via the method

14 Shinichi Mochizuki
in question fails to be Zariski dense in the moduli stack of hyperbolic curves of
type (g,r ) (cf. Corollary 3.8 below).
Finally, to give the reader a feel for the abstract theory — and, in partic-
ular, the state of aﬀairs discussed in Remark 2.5.1 above — we consider the
case of punctured hemi-elliptic orbicurves, in which the situation is understood
somewhat explicitly:
Deﬁnition 2.6. Let X be an orbicurve (cf. Deﬁnition 2.2, (i)) over a ﬁeld of
characteristic zero k.
(i) We shall say that X is a hemi-elliptic orbicurve if it is obtained by
forming the quotient — in the sense of stacks — of an elliptic curve by the
action of ±1.
(ii) We shall say that X is a punctured hemi-elliptic orbicurve if it is ob-
tained by forming the quotient — in the sense of stacks — of a once-punctured
elliptic curve (i.e., the open subscheme given by the complement of the origin
in an elliptic curve) by the action of ±1.
Proposition 2.7. (Punctured Hemi-Elliptic Cores) Let k be an alge-
braically closed ﬁeld of characteristic 0;l e tX be a punctured hemi-elliptic
orbicurve over k.T h e ni fX is non-k-arithmetic, then X is a k-core. In par-
ticular, if X admits nontrivial automorphisms (overk), then X is k-arithmetic.
Finally, there exist precisely 4 isomorphism classes of k-arithmetic X,w h i c h
are described explicitly in [Take2], Theorem 4.1, (i).
Proof. In the following discussion, we omit the “ k-”. Suppose that X is
non-arithmetic.W r i t e
Y → X
for the unique double (´etale) covering by a punctured elliptic curve Y
,a n d
Y → Z
for the unique morphism to the core (i.e., the terminal object in
 Lock(X)=
Lock(Y )). Thus, the induced morphism
Y =
 Y
crs
→
 Z
crs
on the“coarse moduli spaces”(cf. [FC], Chapter I, Theorem 4.10) associated to
the canonical compactiﬁcations
 Y ,
 Z of the orbicurves Y , Z is a ﬁnite ramiﬁed

Canonical Cur ves 15
covering morphism — whose degree we denote by d — from an elliptic curve
Y to a copy of P1
k ∼=
 Z
crs
. Note that since
 Y has only one “cusp” y∞ (i.e.
point ∈
 Y \Y ), and a point of
 Y is a cusp if and only if its image is a cusp
in
 Z, it follows that
 Z also has a unique cusp z∞ ,a n dt h a ty∞ is the unique
point of
 Y lying over z∞ . Moreover, because
 Y →
 Z
crs
arises from a ﬁnite
´etale morphism Y → Z, it follows that the ramiﬁcation index of
 Y →
 Z
crs
is
the same at all points of
 Y lying over a given point of
Z
crs
. Thus, applying the
Riemann-Hurwitz formula yields:
0= −2d +
∑
i
d
ei
(ei − 1)
where the ei are the ramiﬁcation indices over the points of
 Z
crs
at which the
covering morphism ramiﬁes. Thus, we conclude that 2 = ∑
i
1
ei
(ei − 1). Since
all of the ei are integers, one veriﬁes immediately that the only possibilities for
the set of ei’s are the following:
(2, 2, 2, 2); (2, 3, 6); (2, 4, 4); (3, 3, 3)
Note that it follows from the fact that y∞ is the unique point of
 Y lying over
z∞ that d, as well as the ramiﬁcation index at z∞ ,i s necessarily equal to the
largest ei. In the case of (2 , 2, 2, 2), we thus conclude that X = Z,s o X is a
core, as asserted. In the other three cases, we conclude that Y is a ﬁnite ´etale
covering of the orbicurve determined by a “triangle group”(cf. [Take1]) of one
of the following types:
(2, 3, ∞ ); (2, 4, ∞ ); (3, 3, ∞ )
By [Take1], Theorem 3, (ii), such a triangle group is arithmetic,s o X itself is
arithmetic, thus contradicting our hypotheses. This completes the proof of the
ﬁrst assertion of Proposition 2.7.
The second (respectively, third) assertionof Proposition 2.7 is a formal con-
sequence of the ﬁrst assertion of Proposition 2.7 (respectively, [Take2], Theorem
4.1, (i)). ⃝

16 Shinichi Mochizuki
Section 3: Hyperbolically Ordinary Canonical Liftings
In this §, we would like to work over aﬁnite, unramiﬁed extension K of Qp,
where p is a prime number ≥ 5. We denote the ring of integers (respectively,
residue ﬁeld) of K by A (respectively, k). Since A ∼= W(k) (the ring of Witt
vectors with coeﬃcients in k), we have a natural Frobenius morphism
ΦA : A → A
which lifts the Frobenius morphism Φ k : k → k on k. In the following dis-
cussion, the result of base-changing over A (respectively, A; A; Zp)w i t hk
(respectively, K;w i t hA, via ΦA; Z/pnZ, for an integer n ≥ 1) will be denoted
by a subscript k (respectively, subscript K; superscript F; subscript Z/pnZ).
Let
(X → S
def
=S p e c (A),D ⊆ X)
be a smooth, pointed curve of type(g,r ) (for which D is the divisor of marked
points), where 2g −2+r> 0—c f . §0. In the following discussion, we would like
to consider the extent to which (X,D )i sa canonical lifting of (Xk,D k), in the
sense of [Mzk1], Chapter III, §3; Chapter IV. We refer also to the Introduction
of [Mzk2] for a survey of “ p-adic Teichm¨uller theory”(including the theory of
[Mzk1]).
Lemma 3.1. (Canonicality Modulo p2) Suppose that
YK → XK
is a ﬁnite ramiﬁed morphism of smooth, proper, geometrically connected curves
over K which is unramiﬁed away from DK. Denote the reduced induced sub-
scheme associated to the inverse image in YK of DK by EK ⊆ YK.S u p p o s e
further that the reduction
Yk → Xk
modulo p of the normalization Y → X of X in YK has the following form:
(i) Yk is reduced;
(ii) Yk is smooth over k, except for a total of precisely1
2 (p − 1)(2g −
2+ r)( ≥ 2) nodes. Moreover, the “order” of the deformation of each
node determined by Y is equal to 1 (equivalently: Y is regular at the
nodes), and the special ﬁber Ek ⊆ Yk of the closure E ⊆ Y of EK in
Y is a reduced divisor (equivalently: a divisor which is ´etale over k)
at which Yk is smooth.

Canonical Cur ves 17
(iii) Yk has precisely two irreducible components CV , CF . Here,
the morphism CV → Xk (respectively, CF → Xk) is an isomorphism
(respectively,k-isomorphic to the relative Frobenius morphismΦXk /k :
XF
k → Xk of Xk).
(iv) (Xk,D k) admits a nilpotent ordinary indigenous bundle (cf.
[Mzk1], Chapter II, Deﬁnitions 2.4, 3.1) whose supersingular divisor
(cf. [Mzk1], Chapter II, Proposition 2.6, (3)) is equal to the image of
the nodes of Y
k in Xk.
Then (X,D ) is isomorphic modulo p2 to the canonical lifting (cf. [Mzk1],
Chapter III, §3; Chapter IV) determined by the nilpotent indigenous bundle of
(iv).
Remark 3.1.1. In the context of Lemma 3.1, we shall refer to the points of
Xk which are the image of nodes of Yk as supersingular points and to points
which are not supersingular as ordinary. Moreover, the open subscheme of
ordinary points will be denoted by
Xord
k ⊆ Xk
and the corresponding p-adic formal open subscheme of ˆX (the p-adic comple-
tion of X)b y ˆXord. Also, we shall consider X (respectively, Y ) to be equipped
with the log structure(cf. [Kato] for an introduction to the theory of log struc-
tures) determined by the monoid of regular functions invertible on XK \DK
(respectively, YK \EK) and denote the resulting log scheme by Xlog (respec-
tively, Y log). Thus, the morphism of schemes Y → X extends uniquely to a
morphism of log schemes Y log → Xlog.
Proof. First, let us observe that
(Y log)ord
k ∼= {(Xlog)ord
k }F ⋃
(Xlog)ord
k
where the isomorphism is the unique isomorphism lying over Xlog
k .S i n c e
(Xlog)ord,( Y log)ord are log smooth over A, it follows that the inclusion
{(Xlog)ord
k }F ↪→ (Y log)ord
k lifts to a (not necessarily unique!) inclusion
{(Xlog)ord
Z/p2 Z}F ↪→ (Y log)ord
Z/p2Z
whose composite
Ψlog : {(Xlog)ord
Z/p2Z}F → (Xlog)ord
Z/p2 Z

18 Shinichi Mochizuki
with the natural morphism (Y log)ord
Z/p2Z → (Xlog)ord
Z/p2 Z is nevertheless indepen-
dent of the choice of lifting of the inclusion. Indeed, this is formal consequence
of the fact that Ψ log is a lifting of the Frobenius morphism on (Xlog)ord
k (cf.,
e.g., the discussion of [Mzk1], Chapter II, the discussion preceding Proposition
1.2, as well as Remark 3.1.2 below).
Of course, Ψlog might not be regular at the supersingular points, but we
may estimate the order of the poles of Ψlog at the supersingular points as
follows: Since Y is assumed to be regular, it follows that the completion of
YZ/p2Z at a supersingular point ν is given by the formal spectrum Spf of a
complete local ring isomorphic to:
RY
def
=( A/p2 · A)[[s, t]]/(st − p)
(where s, t are indeterminates). Thus, modulo p, this completion is a node,
with the property thatprecisely onebranch — i.e., irreducible component — of
this node lies onCF (respectively, CV ). (Indeed, this follows from the fact that
both CF and CV are smooth over k.) Suppose that the irreducible component
lying on CF is deﬁned locally (modulo p) by the equation t =0 . T h u s ,t h e
ring of regular functions on the ordinary locus of CF restricted to this formal
neighborhood of a supersingular point is given by k[[s]][s−1]. The connected
component of (Y log)ord
Z/p2 Z determined by CF may be thought of as the open
subscheme “ s ̸= 0”. Here, we recall that the parameter s in this discussion is
uniquely determined up to multiplication by an element of R×
Y — cf. [Mzk4],
§3.7.
Next, let us write:
R′
X
def=I m (RY ) ⊆ RY [s−1]
for the image of RY in RY [s−1]. Then since
t = s−1 · p ∈ RY [s−1]=( A/p2 · A)[[s]][s−1]
it follows that R′
X =( A/p2 · A)[[s]][s−1 · p]. In particular, if we think of
RX
def
=( A/p2 · A)[[s]] ⊆ R′
X
—s o RX[s−1]= R′
X[s−1]= RY [s−1] — as a local smooth lifting of CF at
ν, we thus conclude that arbitrary regular functions on Spf (RY ) restrict to
meromorphic functions on Spf(RX) with poles of order ≤ 1 at ν. Thus, since
Ψlog arises from an everywhere regular morphism Y log → Xlog, we conclude
that:

Canonical Cur ves 19
Ψlog has poles of order ≤ 1 at the supersingular points.
But then the conclusion of Lemma 3.1 follows formally from [Mzk1], Chapter
II, Proposition 2.6, (4); Chapter IV, Propositions 4.8, 4.10, Corollary 4.9. ⃝
Remark 3.1.2. The fact — cf. the end of the ﬁrst paragraph of the proof
of Lemma 3.1 — that the order of a pole of a Frobenius lifting is independent
of the choice of smooth lifting of the domain of the Frobenius lifting may be
understood more explicitly in terms of the coordinates used in the latter portion
of the proof of Lemma 3.1 as follows: Any “coordinate transformation”
s ↦→ s + p · g(s)
(where g(s) ∈ k[[s]][s
−1]) ﬁxes — since we are working modulo p2 — functions
of the form sp + p · f(s)( w h e r ef(s) ∈ k[[s]][s−1]). This shows that the order
of the pole of f(s) does not depend on the choice of parameter s.
In the situation of Lemma 3.1, let us denote the natural morphism of
fundamental groups (induced by ( ˆXlog)ord → Xlog)b y
Π(
/CQ
Xlog)ord
def= π1(( ˆXlog)ord
K ) → ΠXlog
def= π1(Xlog
K )= π1(XK \DK)
(for some ﬁxed choice of basepoints). Here, we observe that (by the main
theorem of [Vala]) ( ˆXlog)ord is excellent,s ot h e normalization of ( ˆXlog)ord in
a ﬁnite ´etale covering of ( ˆXlog)ord
K is ﬁnite over ( ˆXlog)ord.T h u s ,(ˆXlog)ord
K has
a “well-behaved theory” of ﬁnite ´etale coverings which is compatible with ´etale
localization on ( ˆXlog)ord. Also, before proceeding, we observe that Π Xlog ﬁts
into an exact sequence:
1 → Δ Xlog → ΠXlog → GK → 1
(where Δ Xlog is deﬁned so as to make the sequence exact).
Lemma 3.2. (The Ordinary Locus Modulo p2) Let VFp be a 2-
dimensional Fp-vector space equipped with a continuous action of ΠXlog up to
±1 — i.e., a representation
ΠXlog → GL±
2 (VFp ) def= GL2(VFp )/{±1}
— such that:

20 Shinichi Mochizuki
(i) The determinant of VFp is isomorphic (as a ΠXlog -module) to
Fp(1).
(ii) There exists a ﬁnite log ´etale Galois covering (i.e., we assume
tame ramiﬁcation over D)
Xlog
± → Xlog
such that the action of ΠXlog up to ±1 on VFp lifts to a (usual) action
(i.e., without sign ambiguities) of ΠXlog
±
⊆ ΠXlog on VFp . This action
is uniquely determined up to tensor product with a character ofΠXlog
±
of order 2.
(iii) The ﬁnite ´etale covering Y log
K → Xlog
K determined by the ﬁnite
ΠXlog -set of 1-dimensional Fp-subspaces ofVFp satisﬁes the hypotheses
of Lemma 3.1.
(iv) Write
(Zlog
± )K → (Xlog
± )K
for the ﬁnite log ´etale covering (of degreep2 − 1) corresponding to the
nonzero portion of VFp. Write
(Y log
± )K → (Xlog
± )K
for the ﬁnite log ´etale covering of smooth curves which is the compos-
ite (i.e., normalization of the ﬁber product overXlog
K ) of the coverings
(Zlog
± )K, Y log
K of Xlog
K .( T h u s ,(Zlog
± )K maps naturally to (Y log
± )K,
hence also to Y log
K .) Let us refer to an irreducible component of the
special ﬁber of a stable reduction of (Y log
± )K (respectively, (Zlog
± )K)
over some ﬁnite extension of K that maps ﬁnitely to the irreducible
component “CF ” (cf. Lemma 3.1) as being“of CF -type” and “asso-
ciated to (Y log
± )K (respectively,(Zlog
± )K)”. Then any irreducible com-
ponent of CF -type associated to(Zlog
± )K is ´etale and free of nodes
over the ordinary locus of any irreducible component of CF -type
associated to (Y log
± )K.
Then (after possibly tensoring VFp with a character of ΠXlog
±
of order 2)t h e
´etale local system Eord
Fp on ( ˆXlog
± )ord
K determined by the Π(
/CQ
Xlog
± )ord -module VFp
arises from a (logarithmic) ﬁnite ﬂat group scheme on ( ˆXlog
± )ord. Moreover,
the Π(
/CQ
Xlog
± )ord -module VFp ﬁts into an exact sequence:
0 → (V etl
Fp )∨(1) → VFp → V etl
Fp → 0

Canonical Cur ves 21
where V etl
Fp is a 1-dimensional Fp-space “up to ±1” whose Π(
/CQ
Xlog
± )ord -action
arises from a ﬁnite ´etale local system on(Xord
± )k ⊆ (X±)k, and the “∨” denotes
the Fp-linear dual.
Proof. As was seen in the proof of Lemma 3.1, we have an isomorphism
(Y log)ord
k ∼= {(Xlog)ord
k }F ⋃
(Xlog)ord
k
which thus determines a decomposition of ( ˆY log)ord into two connected com-
ponents. Moreover, the second connected component on the right-hand side
corresponds to a rank one quotient VFp ↠ QFp which is stabilized by the ac-
tion of Π(
/CQ
Xlog)ord , while the ﬁrst connected component on the right-hand side
parametrizes splittings of this quotient VFp ↠ QFp . Here, we observe that Q⊗2
Fp
admits a natural Π(
/CQ
Xlog)ord -action (i.e., without sign ambiguities).
Now any choice of isomorphism between {( ˆXlog)ord}F and the ﬁrst con-
nected component of (ˆY log)ord determines a lifting of Frobenius
Φlog : {( ˆXlog)ord}F → ( ˆXlog)ord
which is ordinary (by the conclusion of Lemma 3.1 — cf. [Mzk1], Chapter IV,
Proposition 4.10). Thus, by the general theory of ordinary Frobenius liftings,
Φlog determines, in particular, a (logarithmic) ﬁnite ﬂat group scheme annihi-
lated by p which is an extension of the trivial ﬁnite ﬂat group scheme “ Fp”
by the ﬁnite ﬂat group scheme determined by the Cartier dual of some ´ etale
local system of one-dimensional Fp-vector spaces on Xord
k (cf. [Mzk1], Chapter
III, Deﬁnition 1.6); denote the Π (
/CQ
Xlog)ord -module corresponding to this ´etale
local system by ΩFp . Moreover, it is a formal consequence of this general the-
ory that Φlog
K is precisely the covering of ( ˆXlog)ord
K determined by considering
splittings of this extension. Thus, since the Galois closure of this covering has
Galois group given by the semi-direct productof a cyclic group of order p with
a cyclic group of order p − 1, we conclude (by the elementary group theory of
such a semi-direct product) that we have anisomorphism of Π(
/CQ
Xlog)ord -modules:
(QFp )⊗−2(1) ∼= ΩFp (1), i.e.,
(QFp )⊗−2 ∼= ΩFp
We thus conclude that the local system EΦlog
Fp on ( ˆXlog)ord
K determined by this
(logarithmic) ﬁnite ﬂat group scheme arising from the general theory satisﬁes:
EΦlog
Fp |(
/CQ
Xlog
± )ord
K
∼= Eord
Fp ⊗Fp Q∨
F
p

22 Shinichi Mochizuki
Next, let us write χQ for the character (valued in Fp
×)o fΠ (
/CQ
Xlog
± )ord corre-
sponding to QFp . Now it follows formally from condition (iv) of the statement
of Lemma 3.2 that theﬁnite ´etale covering of( ˆXlog
± )ord
K determined by Ker(χQ)
WQ → ( ˆXlog
± )ord
K
is dominated by the composite of someﬁnite ´etale covering of ˆXord
± and a “con-
stant covering”(i.e., a covering arising from a ﬁnite extension L of K). Thus,
the only ramiﬁcation that may occur in the covering WQ arises from ramiﬁ-
cation of the “constant covering”, i.e., the ﬁnite extension L/K.M o r e o v e r ,
(since (QFp )⊗−2 ∼= ΩFp ) the covering determined by Ker(χ2
Q)i s unramiﬁed,s o ,
in fact, we may take L to be the extension K(p
1
2 ). This implies that we may
write
χQ = χ′
Q · χ′′
Q
where the covering determined by the kernel of χ′
Q (respectively, χ′′
Q) is ﬁnite
´etale over ˆXord
± (respectively, the covering arising from base-change fromK to
L). On the other hand, since χ′′
Q extends naturally to Π Xlog
±
, we may assume
(without loss of generality — cf. condition (ii) of the statement of Lemma 3.2)
that χ′′
Q is trivial, hence that QFp arises from an ´etale local system on(Xord
± )k.
But this — together with the isomorphism EΦlog
Fp |(
/CQ
Xlog
± )ord
K
∼= Eord
Fp ⊗Fp Q∨
F
p —
implies the conclusion of Lemma 3.2. ⃝
Lemma 3.3. (Global Logarithmic Finite Flat Group Scheme) Let
VFp be a 2-dimensional Fp-vector space equipped with a continuous action of
ΠXlog up to ±1 which satisﬁes the hypotheses of Lemma 3.2. Then the ´ etale
local system EFp on (Xlog
± )K determined by the ΠXlog
±
-module VFp arises from
a (logarithmic) ﬁnite ﬂat group scheme on Xlog
± .
Proof. Write
Z → X±
for the normalization of X± in the ﬁnite ´etale covering of (Xlog
± )K determined
by the local system EFp .S i n c eX± is regular of dimension 2, it thus follows
that Z is ﬁnite and ﬂat (by the “Auslander-Buchsbaum formula” and “Serre’s
criterion for normality” — cf. [Mtmu], p. 114, p. 125) over X±.M o r e o v e r ,
since ZK is already equipped with a structure of (logarithmic) ﬁnite ﬂat group
scheme, which, by the conclusion of Lemma 3.2, extends naturally over the

Canonical Cur ves 23
generic point of the special ﬁber of X — since it extends (by the proof of
Lemma 3.2) to a regular, hence normal, (logarithmic) ﬁnite ﬂat group scheme
over the ordinary locus — it thus suﬃces to verify that this ﬁnite ﬂat group
scheme structure extends (uniquely) over the supersingular points of X
±.B u t
this follows formally from [Mtmu], p. 124, Theorem 38 — i.e., the fact (applied
to X±,n o tZ!) that a meromorphic function on a normal scheme is regular if
and only if it is regular at the primes of height 1 — and the fact thatZ (hence
also Z ×X± Z)i s ﬁnite and ﬂat over X±. ⃝
Lemma 3.4. (The Associated Dieudonn´ e Crystal Modulo p) Let
VFp be a 2-dimensional Fp-vector space equipped with a continuous action of
ΠXlog up to ±1 which satisﬁes the hypotheses of Lemma 3.2. Suppose, further,
that the ΠXlog -module (up to ±1) VFp satisﬁes the following condition:
(† M) The GK-module
M
def
= H1(Δ Xlog , Ad(VFp ))
(where Ad(VFp ) ⊆ End(VFp ) is the subspace of endomorphisms whose
trace =0 ) ﬁts into an exact sequence:
0 → G−1(M) → M → G2(M) → 0
where G2(M) (respectively, G−1(M)) is isomorphic to the result of
tensoring an unramiﬁed GK-module whose dimension over Fp is
equal to 3g − 3+ r with the Tate twist Fp(2) (respectively, Fp(−1)).
Then the “ MF∇ -object (up to ±1)” (cf. [Falt], §2) determined by the ΠXlog -
module (up to ±1) VFp (cf. Lemma 3.3) arises from the (unique) nilpotent
ordinary indigenous bundle of Lemma 3.1, (iv).
Proof. First, we recall from the theory of [Falt], §2, that the conclusion of
Lemma 3.3 implies thatVFp arises from an “ MF∇ -object (up to ±1)”on Xlog,
as in the theory of [Falt], §2. Here, the reader uncomfortable with “ MF ∇ -
objects up to ±1” may instead work with a usual MF ∇ -object over Xlog
±
equipped with an “action of Gal( Xlog
± /Xlog)u pt o ±1”. Write Fk for the
vector bundle on (X±)k underlying the MF ∇ -object on Xlog
± determined by
EFp .
Thus, Fk is a vector bundle of rank 2, whose Hodge ﬁltration is given by
a subbundle F1(Fk) ⊆F k of rank 1. Moreover, the Kodaira-Spencer morphism
of this subbundle, as well as the “Hasse invariant”
Φ∗
X± F1(Fk)∨ ↪→F k ↠ Fk/F1(Fk) ∼= F1(Fk)∨

24 Shinichi Mochizuki
(where ΦX± is the Frobenius morphism on X±; and the injection is the mor-
phism that arises from the Frobenius action on the MF ∇ -object in question),
is generically nonzero. Indeed, these facts all follow immediately from our
analysis of EFp over the ordinary locus in the proof of Lemma 3.2.
Next, let us observe thatthis Hasse invariant has at least one zero. Indeed,
if it were nonzero everywhere, it would follow formally from the general theory
of MF ∇ -objects (cf. [Falt], §2) that the Π Xlog -module (up to ±1) VFp admits
aΠ Xlog -invariant subspace of Fp-dimension 1 — cf. the situation over the
ordinary locus in the proof of Lemma 3.2, over which the Hasse invariant is,
in fact, nonzero. On the other hand, this implies that YK → XK admits a
section, hence that Y is not connected. But this contradicts the fact (cf. the
proof of Lemma 3.1) that the two irreducible components CV , CF of Yk (cf.
Lemma 3.1, (iii)) necessarily meet at the nodes of Yk. (Here, we recall from
Lemma 3.1, (ii), that there exists at least one node on Yk.)
In particular, it follows from the fact that the Hasse invariant is generically
nonzero, but not nonzero everywhere that the degree of the line bundle F1(F)
on (X±)k is positive. Note that since F1(F)⊗2 descends naturally to a line
bundle L on Xk, we thus obtain that
1 ≤ deg(L) ≤ 2g − 2+ r
(where the second inequality follows from the fact that the Kodaira-Spencer
morphism in nonzero).
Now, we conclude — from the p-adic Hodge theory of [Falt], §2; [Falt], §5,
Theorem 5.3 — that the condition ( † M) implies various consequences concern-
ing the Hodge ﬁltration on the ﬁrst de Rham cohomology module of Ad of the
MF ∇ -object determined by VFp , which may be summarized by the inequality:
h1(Xk, L−1)= h0(Xk, L⊗ OX ωX) ≥ 3g − 3+ r
(where “ hi” denotes the dimension over k of “ Hi”) — cf. [Mzk1], IV, Theo-
rem 1.3 (and its proof), which, in essence, addresses the Zp analogue of the
present Fp-vector space situation. (Note that here we makeessential use of the
hypothesis p ≥ 5.) Thus, (cf. loc. cit. ) we conclude that (since deg( L) > 0)
the line bundle L⊗ OX ωX on Xk is nonspecial, hence (by the above inequality)
that:
deg(L)=d e g (L⊗ OX ωX) − deg(ωX)
= h0(Xk, L⊗ OX ωX)+( g − 1) − 2(g − 1)
≥ 3g − 3+ r − (g − 1) = 2g − 2+ r

Canonical Cur ves 25
Combining this with the inequalities of the preceding paragraph, we thus obtain
that deg(L)=2 g − 2+ r,s ot h e MF ∇ -object in question is an indigenous
bundle, which is necessarily equal to the indigenous bundle of Lemma 3.1, (iv),
since the supersingular locus of the former is contained in the supersingular
locus of the latter (cf. [Mzk1], Chapter II, Proposition 2.6, (4)). ⃝
Lemma 3.5. (Canonical Deformations Modulo Higher Powers
of p) Let V
Fp be a 2-dimensional Fp-vector space equipped with a continuous
action of ΠXlog up to ±1 which satisﬁes the hypotheses of Lemmas 3.2, 3.4.
Suppose that, for some n ≥ 1:
(i) (X,D ) is isomorphic modulo pn to a canonical lifting (as in
[Mzk1], Chapter III, §3; Chapter IV).
(ii) VFp is the reduction modulo p of a rank 2 free Z/pnZ-module
VZ/pn Z with continuous ΠXlog -action up to ±1.
Then (X,D ) is isomorphic modulopn+1 to a canonical lifting, and theΠXlog -
set P(VZ/pn Z) (of free, rank one Z/pnZ-module quotients of VZ/pn Z)i si s o m o r -
phic to the projectivization of the canonical representation modulo pn (cf.
[Mzk1], Chapter IV, Theorem 1.1) associated to (X,D ). Finally, if the deter-
minant of VZ/pn Z is isomorphic to (Z/pnZ)(1), then the ΠXlog -module (up to
±1) VZ/pn Z is isomorphic to the canonical representation modulopn.
Proof. First, we observe that the case n = 1 is a formal consequence of
Lemmas 3.1, 3.4. The case of generaln is then, in essence, aformal consequence
of the theory of [Mzk1], Chapter V, §1 — cf. especially, Theorem 1.7, and the
discussion following it. We review the details as follows:
The space of deformations (of the projectivization) of the Π Xlog -module
“up to ±1” VFp may be thought of as a formal scheme
R
which is noncanonically isomorphic to Spf( Zp[[t1,...,t 2(3g−3+r)]]) (where the
ti’s are indeterminates) — cf. the discussion preceding [Mzk1], Chapter V,
Lemma 1.5. Write RPD for the p-adic completion of the PD-envelope of R at
the Fp-valued point deﬁned by “ VFp ”. Note that R and RPD are equipped
with a natural GK-action. Then according to the theory of loc. cit.,t h e r ei sa
GK-equivariant closed immersion of formal schemes (cf. Remark 3.5.1 below)
κPD : Spf( ˆDGal) ↪→R PD

26 Shinichi Mochizuki
where ˆDGal is noncanonically isomorphic to the p-adic completion of the PD-
envelope at the closed point of a power series ringZp[[t1,...,t 3g−3+r]] equipped
with a natural GK-action.
Now it follows from the theory of loc. cit., the induction hypothesis on n,
and the assumptions (i), (ii) of Lemma 3.5, thatVZ/pn− 1 Z
def
= VZ/pn Z ⊗ Z/pn−1Z
corresponds (at least projectively) to thecanonical representation modulopn−1,
hence determines a GK-invariant rational point
σn−1 ∈R PD(Z/pn−1Z)
that lies in the image Im(κPD) of κPD. Thus, the point
σn ∈R PD(Z/pnZ)
determined byVZ/pn Z may be regarded as aGK-invariant deformation of σn−1.
Note that the set of deformations of σn−1 naturally forms a torsor T over the
Fp-vector spaceM of Lemma 3.4. Sinceσn−1 ∈ Im(κPD), this torsor is equipped
with a natural GK-stable subspace
T ′′ ⊆T
(consisting of the deformations that lie ∈ Im(κPD)) which is (by the theory
of loc. cit.)a torsor over G−1(M). In particular, this subspace determines a
GK-invariant trivialization τ′ of the G2(M)-torsor
(T ↠) T ′
given by the “change of structure group M ↠ G2(M)”.
Now let us observe that by († M ) and the fact thatp ≥ 5 — so the square of
the cyclotomic character GK → Fp
× is nontrivial — G2(M) has no nontrivial
Galois invariants, i.e.:
G2(M)GK =0
Thus, we conclude that τ′ is the unique GK-invariant point of T ′, hence that
the image in T ′ of the point τn ∈T determined by σn is necessarily equal to
τ′, i.e., τn ∈T ′′ — or, in other words, σn ∈ Im(κPD).
On the other hand, if we interpret theGalois-theoretic fact that σn−1 lifts
to a GK-invariant σn ∈ Im(κPD) in terms of the original ﬁnite ´etale coverings
— combinatorial information concerning which the Galois theory is intended
to encode — then we obtain the following conclusion: The A-valued point

Canonical Cur ves 27
α ∈N (A)
of the Zp-smooth p-adic formal scheme N
def
= Nord
g,r (cf. [Mzk1], Chapter III, §2)
determined by (X,D ) and the nilpotent ordinary indigenous bundle modulo p
of Lemma 3.4 not only lies — by assumption (i) of the statement of Lemma
3.5 — in the image of N(A) under the (n − 1)-st iterate Φn−1
N of the canonical
Frobenius lifting
ΦN : N→ N
on (cf. [Mzk1], Chapter III, Theorem 2.8) but also in the image of N(A) un-
der the n-th iterate Φn
N of ΦN . (Indeed, the restriction of the covering Φ n−1
N
(respectively, Φn
N )t o α admits a section, determined by the GK-invariant ra-
tional point σn−1 (respectively, σn).) Thus, we conclude that Xlog is canonical
modulo pn+1. Finally, since
G−1(M)GK =0
we conclude thatσn is the unique GK-invariant lifting of σn−1 to Z/pnZ, hence
that VZ/pn Z corresponds (projectively) to the canonical representation modulo
pn, as desired. ⃝
Remark 3.5.1. In some sense, it is natural to think of Im(κPD) (cf. the proof
of Lemma 3.5) as the “crystalline locus” in the space of “all” representations
RPD.
Theorem 3.6. (Group-Theoreticity of Canonical Liftings) Let p ≥ 5
be a prime number. For i =1 , 2,l e tKi be an unramiﬁed ﬁnite extension of
Qp,a n d(Xi,D i) a smooth pointed curve of type (gi,r i) over OKi ,w h e r e
2gi − 2+ ri > 0. Assume that we have chosen basepoints of the (Xi)Ki \(Di)Ki
(which thus induce basepoints of the Ki); denote the resulting fundamental
group by ΠXlog
i
. Suppose that we have been given an isomorphism of proﬁ-
nite groups :
ΠXlog
1
∼
→ ΠXlog
2
Then:
(i) (X1,D1) is a canonical lifting (in the sense of [Mzk1], Chapter III,
§3; Chapter IV) if and only if (X2,D2) is so.
(ii) If at least one of the (Xi,D i) is a canonical lifting, then the isomor-
phism on logarithmic special ﬁbers of [Mzk7], Theorem 2.7, lifts (uniquely) to
an isomorphism (X1,D1)
∼
→ (X2,D2) over OK1
∼= W(k1)
∼
→ W(k2) ∼= OK2 .

28 Shinichi Mochizuki
Proof. Let us verify (i). Since, by [Mzk7], Theorem 2.7 (and [Mzk7], Propo-
sition 1.2.1, (vi)), the logarithmic special ﬁbers of all stable reductions of all
ﬁnite ´etale coverings of (X
i)Ki \(Di)Ki are “group-theoretic”,it follows that the
conditions (i), (ii), (iii), (iv) of Lemma 3.1, as well as the conditions (i), (ii),
(iii), (iv) of Lemma 3.2, are allgroup-theoreticconditions which, moreover, (by
the theory of [Mzk1], Chapter III, §3; Chapter IV) are satisﬁed by canonical
liftings. (Here, relative to the assertion that canonical liftings satisfy Lemma
3.1, (ii), and Lemma 3.2, (iv), we remind the reader that:
(1) Since p ≥ 5, the special ﬁber of the curve Y of Lemma 3.1 has
≥ 2 nodes (cf. Lemma 3.1, (ii)), which implies that the curve Y is
stable (i.e., even without the marked points).
(2) The smooth locus of any model of a curve over a discrete val-
uation ring necessarily maps to the stable model (whenever it exists)
of the curve — cf., e.g., [JO]— and, moreover, whenever this map is
quasi-ﬁnite , necessarily embeds as an open subscheme of the smooth
locus of the stable model.)
Moreover, (since the cyclotomic character and inertia subgroup are group-
theoretic — cf. [Mzk7], Proposition 1.2.1, (ii), (vi) — it follows that) condition
(†
M ) of Lemma 3.4 is a group-theoretic condition which (by the theory of loc.
cit.) is satisﬁed by canonical liftings. Thus, successive application of Lemma
3.5 for n =1 , 2,... implies assertion (i) of the statement of Theorem 3.6.
Next, let us observe that when one (hence both) of the (Xi,D i) is a canon-
ical lifting, it follows from Lemma 3.1 that the isomorphism of special ﬁbers
(X1,D1)k1
∼→ (X2,D2)k2
(lying over some isomorphism k1
∼
→ k2) determined by [Mzk7], Theorem 2.7
is compatible with the nilpotent ordinary indigenous bundles on either side
that give rise to the canonical liftings. On the other hand, by the theory of
loc. cit., the lifting of (X
i,D i)ki over OKi
∼= W(ki) is determined uniquely by
the fact that this lifting is “canonical” (i.e., when it is indeed the case that it
is canonical!). This completes the proof of assertion (ii) of the statement of
Theorem 3.6. ⃝
Remark 3.6.1. Thus, (cf. Remarks 1.1.1, 2.2.1) unlike the situation with
Proposition 1.1, Theorem 2.2:
Theorem 3.6 provides, for each hyperbolic ( g,r ), “lots of examples”
— in particular, an example lifting a general curve of type ( g,r )i n
characteristic p ≥ 5 — of ( X
K ,D K) which are group-theoretically
determined solely by the proﬁnite group π1(XK \DK).

Canonical Cur ves 29
In fact, the exact same arguments of the present §3 show that the analogue
of Theorem 3.6 also holds for “Lubin-Tate canonical curves (for various tones
ϖ)” — i.e., the curves deﬁned by considering canonical points (cf. [Mzk2],
Chapter VIII, §1.1) associated to the canonical Frobenius lifting of [Mzk2],
Chapter VIII, Theorem 3.1, in the case of a “VF-pattern Π of pure tone ϖ”.
One feature of the Lubin-Tate case that diﬀers (cf. [Mzk7], Proposition
1.2.1, (vi)) from the “classical ordinary” case of [Mzk1] is that it is not imme-
diately clear that the “Lubin-Tate character”
χ : G
K → W(Fq)×
(where Fq is a ﬁnite extension of Fp)i s group-theoretic. Note, however, that at
least for the “portion of χ modulo p”
GK → Fq
×
group-theoreticity — at least after passing to a ﬁnite unramiﬁed extension of
the original base ﬁeld K (which does not present any problems, from the point
of view of proving the Lubin-Tate analogue of Theorem 3.6) — is a consequence
of the fact that theﬁeld structure on (the union of 0 and) the torsion inG
ab
K of
order prime top is group-theoretic (cf. [Mzk7], Lemma 2.6, Theorem 2.7). This
much issuﬃcient for the Lubin-Tate analoguesof Lemmas 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5
(except for the last sentence of the statement of Lemma 3.5, which is, at any
rate, not necessary to prove Theorem 3.6), and hence of Theorem 3.6. Finally,
once one has proved that the curve in question is (Lubin-Tate) canonical and
recovered its canonical representationV
Zp , at least projectively, then it follows,
by considering the W(Fq)-module analogue of the exact sequence of Fp-vector
spaces in the conclusion of Lemma 3.2, over the ordinary locus, that (even if
one only knows V
Zp “projectively”) one may recover the Lubin-Tate character
by forming
Hom(third nonzero term of the exact sequence,
ﬁrst nonzero term of the exact sequence)
— at least up to un “´etale twist”,i.e., up to multiplication by someunramiﬁed
character GK → W(Fq)×. (We leave the remaining routine technical details
of the Lubin-Tate case to the enthusiastic reader.) At the time of writing, it
is not clear to the author whether or not it is possible to eliminate this “´etale
twist”. Since this ´etale twist corresponds to the well-known dependence of the
Lubin-Tate group on the choice of uniformizer, this indeterminacy with respect
to an ´etale twist may be thought of as being related to the fact that (at the

30 Shinichi Mochizuki
present time) the author is unable to prove thegroup-theoreticity of the natural
uniformizer “p”— cf. [Mzk7], Remark 2.7.2.
At any rate, the theory of the present §3 constitutes the case of “tone
0”. Moreover, one checks easily — by considering the “FL-bundle” (as in
[Mzk1], Chapter II, Proposition 1.2) determined by the lifting modulo p2 —
that canonical curves of distinct tones are never isomorphic. Thus, (at least
when r = 0) the Lubin-Tate canonical curves give rise to (strictly) more ex-
amples of (proper) hyperbolic X
K which are group-theoretically determined
solely by the proﬁnite group π1(XK). This prompts the following interesting
question: Is this “list” complete? — i.e.:
Do there exist any other curves(XK,D K) that are group-theoretically
determined solely by the proﬁnite group π1(XK \DK)?
At the time of writing, the author does not even have a conjectural answer to
this question.
Remark 3.6.2. One interesting aspect of the theory of the present§3i st h a t ,
to the knowledge of the author:
It constitutes the ﬁrst application of the “ p-adic Teichm¨uller theory”
of [Mzk1], [Mzk2], to prove a hitherto unknown result (cf. Corollary
3.8 below) that lies outside — i.e., can be stated without using the
terminology, concepts, or results of — the theory of [Mzk1], [Mzk2].
Moreover, not only does this constitute the ﬁrst application of “ p-adic Te-
ichm¨uller theory” to prove a new result (cf. the proof of the irreducibility of
the moduli stack via p-adic Teichm¨uller theory in [Mzk2], Chapter III, §2.5 —
an application, albeit to an old result), it is interesting relative to the original
philosophical motivationfor this theory, involving the analogy touniformization
theory/Teichm¨uller theory over the complex numbers, which was to construct a
p-adic theory that would allow one to prove a “p-adic version of the Grothen-
dieck Conjecture”as in [Mzk6] — cf. [Mzk2], Introduction, §0.10, for more on
these ideas.
Remark 3.6.3. One interesting point of view is the following:
For a hyperbolic curveXK over a ﬁnite extension K of Qp, considera-
tion of the proﬁnite group ΠXK should be thought of as thearithmetic
analogue of considering a hyperbolic curve (which is given a priori)
over Fp[[t]][t−1]—w h e r et is an indeterminate which, perhaps, should
be thought of as thesymbol “p”— “in the absolute”, i.e., “stripped

Canonical Cur ves 31
of its structure morphism to aspeciﬁc copy of Fp[[t]][t−1]”, or, alterna-
tively, “when we allow the indeterminate t to vary freely (in Fp[[t]])”.
Thus, from this point of view, it isnatural to expect that the hyperbolic curves
XK most likely to be recoverable from the absolute datum Π XK are those
which are “deﬁned over some (ﬁctitious) absolute ﬁeld of constants inside
K” — hence which have moduli that are invariant with respect to changes of
variable t ↦→ t + t2 + ... . In particular, since one expects canonical curves to
be arithmetic analogues of “curves deﬁned over the constant ﬁeld” (cf. [Mzk2],
Introduction, §2.3), it is perhaps not surprising that they should satisfy the
property of Theorem 3.6.
Moreover, this point of view suggests that:
Perhaps it is natural to regard Theorem 3.6 as the proper analogue for
hyperbolic canonical curves of the fact that Serre-Tate canonical lift-
ings (of abelian varieties) are deﬁned over number ﬁelds (cf. [Mzk2],
Introduction, §2.1, Open Question (7)).
Indeed, one way of showing that Serre-Tate canonical liftings — or, indeed, ar-
bitrary abelian varieties with lots of endomorphisms — are deﬁned over number
ﬁelds is by thinking of the algebraic extension
Qp of Qp over which such abelian
varieties are a priori deﬁned“in the absolute”,i.e., as atranscendental extension
of Q and considering what happens when one transports such abelian varieties
via arbitrary ﬁeld automorphisms of
 Qp. Such ﬁeld automorphisms are rem-
iniscent of the “changes of variable” appearing in the approach to thinking
about“recovering XK from the absolute datum ΠXK ” described above.
Remark 3.6.4. The “rigidity” of canonical curves — in the sense that they
are determined by the existence of theunique GK-invariant lifting “VZp ”o ft h e
representation VFp (cf. Lemma 3.5 and its proof) — is reminiscent, at least
at a technical level, of the theory of deformations of representations applied in
Wiles’ famous proof of the “modularity conjecture” (cf. [Wiles]). It would be
interesting if this analogy could be pursued in more detail in the future.
Remark 3.6.5. Just as the Serre-Tate canonical coordinates are used in
[Mzk5], §9, to prove a weak p-adic Grothendieck Conjecture-type resultfor hy-
perbolic curves over p-adic ﬁelds whose Jacobians have ordinary reduction, the
techniques of the present § may be applied — by using the canonical coordi-
nates of [Mzk1]— to prove a similar (but in some sense even weaker) p-adic
Grothendieck Conjecture-type result for hyperbolic curves over absolutely un-
ramiﬁed p-adic ﬁelds which are isomorphic to canonical curves (as in [Mzk1])
modulo p
2. Thus, the true signiﬁcance of the theory of the present § lies in
its wide applicability in the canonical lifting case (cf. Corollary 3.8 below),

32 Shinichi Mochizuki
a feature which diﬀers substantially from the theory in the case of ordinary
Jacobians (cf. Remark 1.1.1).
Deﬁnition 3.7. Let YL be a hyperbolic curve over a ﬁnite extensionL of Qp.
Then we shall say that YL is absolute if for every other hyperbolic curve Y ′
L′
over a ﬁnite extension L′ of Qp,
π1(YL) ∼= π1(Y ′
L′ )
(as proﬁnite groups) implies that Y ′
L′ is isomorphic as aQp-scheme to YL.A l s o ,
we shall refer to points in moduli stacks of hyperbolic curves over Qp that are
deﬁned by absolute hyperbolic curves as absolute.
Corollary 3.8. (Application of p-adic T eichm¨uller Theory)
(i) A general pointed smooth curve(Xk,D k) of type (g,r ),w h e r e2g − 2+
r> 0, over a ﬁnite ﬁeld k of characteristic p ≥ 5 may be lifted to a pointed
smooth curve (XK,D K) over the quotient ﬁeld K of the ring of Witt vectors
A = W(k) such that the hyperbolic curve XK \DK is absolute.
(ii) In particular, for each (g,r ), p ≥ 5, there exists a Zariski dense
— hence (at least when 3g − 3+ r ≥ 1) inﬁnite — set of absolute points ,
valued in absolutely unramiﬁed ﬁnite extensions of Qp, of the moduli stack of
hyperbolic curves of type (g,r ) over Qp.
Proof. Assertion (i) follows formally from Theorem 3.6; [Mzk7], Lemmas 1.1.4,
1.1.5; and [Mzk7], Proposition 1.2.1, (v). Assertion (ii) follows formally from
assertion (i) and the following elementary argument: The scheme-theoretic
closure of the points of assertion (i) in the (compactiﬁed) moduli stack overZ
p
forms a Zp-ﬂat proper algebraic stack Z with the property that Z ⊗ Fp is equal
to the entire moduli stack over Fp, hence is smooth of dimension 3 g − 3+ r.
But this implies — by Zp-ﬂatness —t h a tZ ⊗ Qp is also of dimension 3g −3+ r,
hence equal to the entire moduli stack over Qp, as desired. ⃝

Canonical Cur ves 33
Bibliography
Unpublished RIMS preprints are available as .ps ﬁles at:
http://www.kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp/∼kenkyubu/paper/all.html
[DM] P. Deligne and D. Mumford, The Irreducibility of the Moduli Space of
Curves of Given Genus, IHES Publ. Math. 36 (1969), pp. 75-109.
[DO] B. Dwork and A. Ogus, Canonical liftings of Jacobians, Compositio Math.
58 (1986), pp. 111-131.
[Edix] B. Edixhoven, On the Andr´ e-Oort conjecture for Hilbert modular sur-
faces, Moduli of abelian varieties (Texel Island, 1999), Progr. Math. 195,
Birkh¨auser (2001), pp. 133-155.
[Falt] G. Faltings, Crystalline Cohomology and p-adic Galois Representations,
Proceedings of the First JAMI Conference, Johns Hopkins University Press
(1990), pp. 25-79.
[FC] G. Faltings and C.-L. Chai, Degenerations of Abelian Varieties, Springer-
Verlag (1990).
[Groth] A. Grothendieck, Letter to G. Faltings (June 1983) in Lochak, L. Schneps,
Geometric Galois Actions; 1. Around Grothendieck’s Esquisse d’un Pro-
gramme, London Math. Soc. Lect. Note Ser. 242, Cambridge Univ. Press
(1997).
[JO] A. J. de Jong and F. Oort, On Extending Families of Curves, Journal of
Alg. Geom. 6 (1997), pp. 545-562.
[Kato] K. Kato, Logarithmic Structures of Fontaine-Illusie, Proceedings of the
First JAMI Conference, Johns Hopkins University Press (1990), pp. 191-
224.
[Knud] F. F. Knudsen, The Projectivity of the Moduli Space of Stable Curves, II,
Math. Scand. 52 (1983), 161-199.
[Mtmu] H. Matsumura, Commutative Algebra (Second Edition) , The Ben-
jamin/Cummings Publishing Company (1980).
[Mess] W. Messing, The Crystals Associated to Barsotti-Tate Groups; with Appli-
cations to Abelian Schemes, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 264, Springer-
Verlag (1972).
[Mzk1] S. Mochizuki, A Theory of Ordinary p-adic Curves, Publ. of RIMS 32
(1996), pp. 957-1151.
[Mzk2] S. Mochizuki, Foundations of p-adic Teichm¨uller Theory , AMS/IP
Studies in Advanced Mathematics 11, American Mathematical Soci-
ety/International Press (1999).

34 Shinichi Mochizuki
[Mzk3] S. Mochizuki, Correspondences on Hyperbolic Curves, Journ. Pure Appl.
Algebra 131 (1998), pp. 227-244.
[Mzk4] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of the Compactiﬁcation of the Hurwitz
Scheme, Publ. of RIMS 31 (1995), pp. 355-441.
[Mzk5] S. Mochizuki, The Proﬁnite Grothendieck Conjecture for Closed Hyper-
bolic Curves over Number Fields,J. Math. Sci., Univ. Tokyo3 (1996), pp.
571-627.
[Mzk6] S. Mochizuki, The Local Pro-p Anabelian Geometry of Curves, Invent.
Math. 138 (1999), pp. 319-423.
[Mzk7] S. Mochizuki, The Absolute Anabelian Geometry of Hyperbolic Curves ,
RIMS Preprint No. 1363 (June 2002).
[NTM] H. Nakamura, A. Tamagawa, and S. Mochizuki, The Grothendieck Conjec-
ture on the Fundamental Groups of Algebraic Curves,Sugaku Expositions
14 (2001), pp. 31-53.
[OS] F. Oort and T. Sekiguchi, The canonical lifting of an ordinary Jacobian
variety need not be a Jacobian variety,J. Math. Soc. Japan38 (1986), pp.
427-437.
[SGA1] Revˆetement ´etales et groupe fondamental ,S ´eminaire de G´ eometrie
Alg´ebrique du Bois Marie 1960-1961 (SGA1), dirig´ e par A. Grothen-
dieck, augment´e de deux expos´ es de M. Raynaud, Lecture Notes in
Mathematics 224, Springer-Verlag (1971).
[Take1] K. Takeuchi, Arithmetic Triangle Groups, Journ. Math. Soc. Japan 29
(1977), pp. 91-106.
[Take2] K. Takeuchi, Arithmetic Fuchsian Groups with Signature (1; e), Journ.
Math. Soc. Japan 35 (1983), pp. 381-407.
[Tama] A. Tamagawa, The Grothendieck Conjecture for Aﬃne Curves,Compositio
Math. 109 (1997), pp. 135-194.
[Vala] P. Valabrega, A Few Theorems on Completion of Excellent Rings,Nagoya
Math J. 61 (1976), pp. 127-133.
[Wiles] A. Wiles, Modular elliptic curves and Fermat’s last theorem,Ann. of Math.
141 (1995), pp. 443-551.
Research Institute
for Mathematical Sciences
Kyoto University
Kyoto 606-8502, JAPAN