CONFORMAL AND QUASICONFORMAL CATEGORICAL
REPRESENTATION OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURFACES
Shinichi Mochizuki
August 2006
/BT/CQ/D7/D8/D6/CP /CR/D8/BA In this paper, we consider various categories of hyperbolic Riemann sur-
faces and show, in various cases, that the conformal or quasiconformal structure of
the Riemann surface may be reconstructed, up to possible confusion between holo-
morphic and anti-holomorphic structures, in a natural way from such a category. The
theory exposed in the present paper is motivated partly by a classical result concern-
ing the categorical representation of sober topological spaces, partly by previous work
of the author concerning the categorical representation of arithmetic log schemes, and
partly by a certain analogy with p-adic anabelian geometry — an analogy which the
theory of the present paper serves to render more explicit.
Contents:
Introduction
§0. Notations and Conventions
§1. Reconstruction via the Upper Half-Plane Uniformization
§2. Categories of Parallelograms, Rectangles, and Squares
Appendix: Quasiconformal Linear Algebra
Introduction
In this paper, we continue our study [cf., [Mzk2], [Mzk10]] of the topic of
representing various objects that appear in conventional arithmetic geometry by
means of categories. As discussed in [Mzk2], [Mzk10], this point of view is partially
motivated by the anabelian philosophy of Grothendieck [cf., e.g., [Mzk3], [Mzk4],
[Mzk5]], and, in particular, by the more recent work of the author on absolute
anabelian geometry [cf. [Mzk6], [Mzk7], [Mzk8], [Mzk9], [Mzk11], [Mzk12]].
One way to think about anabelian geometry is that it concerns the issue of
representing schemes by means of categories [i.e., Galois categories] that capture
certain aspects of the [´etale] topology of the scheme [i.e., its fundamental group].
From this point of view, another important, albeit elementary, example of the issue
2000 Mathematical Subject Classiﬁcation. 14H55, 30F60.
Typeset by AMS-TEX
1

2 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
of representing a “space” by means of a“category of topological origin”is the well-
known example of thecategory of open subsets of a sober topological space[cf., e.g.,
[Mzk2], Theorem 1.4; [Mzk10], Proposition 4.1]. In some sense, this example is the
example that motivated the construction of the categories appearing in the present
paper.
The main results of this paper may be summarized as follows:
(1) The holomorphic structure of a hyperbolic Riemann surface of ﬁnite type
may be reconstructed, up to possible confusion with the corresponding
anti-holomorphic structure, from a certain category of localizationsof the
Riemann surface that includes the upper half-plane uniformization of the
Riemann surface, together with its natural PSL 2(R)-action [cf. Theorem
1.12].
(2) Given a hyperbolic Riemann surface of ﬁnite type equipped with a
nonzero logarithmic square diﬀerential, one may deﬁne certain categories
of parallelograms, rectangles, or squares associated to this data. Then
[isomorphism classes of] equivalences between corresponding categories of
parallelograms (respectively, rectangles; squares) are in natural bijective
correspondence with [quasiconformal] Teichm¨uller mappings (respectively,
conformal mappings) between such Riemann surfaces equipped with dif-
ferentials, again up to possible confusion between holomorphic and anti-
holomorphic structures [cf. Theorem 2.3].
Here, we note that the categories of (2) are especially close to the “categories of open
subsets of a sober topological space” referred to above — i.e., roughly speaking, in-
stead of consideringall the open subsets of the Riemann surface, one restricts oneself
to those which are “parallelograms”(or, alternatively, “rectangles”,o r “squares”),
in a sense determined by the natural parameters [i.e., of Teichm¨uller theory — cf.,
e.g., [Lehto], Chapter IV, §6.1] associated to the given square diﬀerential.
On the other hand, from another point of view, the main motivation for the re-
sults obtained in this paper came from the analogy withp-adic anabelian geometry.
This analogy has been pointed out previously by the author [cf., e.g., [Mzk1], Intro-
duction, §0.10; [Mzk5], §3]. In some sense, however, the theory of the present paper
allows one to make this analogymore explicit. Indeed, at the level of“objects under
consideration”the theory of the present paper suggests a certain “dictionary”,a s
summarized in Table 1 below.
The ﬁrst two non-italicized rows of Table 1 are motivated by the fact that
the datum of a nonzero logarithmic square diﬀerential may be thought of, in the
context of Teichm¨uller theory, as the datum of a geodesic in Teichm¨uller space. In
particular, if one thinks of oneself as only knowing the diﬀerentialup to a nonzero
complex multiple[cf. Theorem 2.3], then one is, in essence, working with a“complex
Teichm¨uller geodesic”. Moreover, just as such a “complex geodesic” is of “holomor-
phic dimension” one and “real/topological dimension” two, the spectrum of the ring
of integers of ap-adic local ﬁeld K is of algebraic dimension one, while the absolute
Galois group G
K of the p-adic local ﬁeld K is of cohomological dimension two. This

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 3
observation also motivates the point of view of the third non-italicized row of Table
1, which is also discussed in [Mzk1], Introduction, §0.10. From the point of view of
this third non-italicized row of Table 1, the conformal structure may be thought of
as the metric, or “angular”, structure of the S1 acting by rotations locally on the
surface. On the other hand, from the point of view of p-adic anabelian geometry,
one may completely recover the algebraic structure of the p-adic curve in question
[cf. the main result of [Mzk4]], so long as one restricts oneself to working withgeo-
metric isomorphisms [i.e., isomorphisms arising from isomorphisms of ﬁelds] of the
absolute Galois groups of the p-adic local ﬁelds in question. Moreover, as one sees
from the theory of [Mzk3], this geometricity condition corresponds to the preser-
vation of the metric structureof the copy of the units O×
K inside the abelianization
Gab
K of GK [more precisely, the preservation of such metric structures for all open
subgroups of GK].
complex case
 p-adic case
the given Riemann surface
 the logarithmic special ﬁber
a complex Teichm¨uller geodesic
 a lifting of the special ﬁber
originating from the given
 to a hyperbolic curve over a
Riemann surface
 p-adic local ﬁeld K
action of C× on the
 action of the absolute Galois
surface by rotations (S1 ⊆ C×)
 group GK on [the Galois
and ﬂows ( R× ⊆ C×)
 category associated to]
the proﬁnite geometric
fundamental group
squares, rectangles, as opposed
 preservation of the metric
to parallelograms — i.e., preservation
 structure of the copy
of the metric structure of S1
 of O×
K in Gab
K
Table 1: Dictionary of objects under consideration
This “dictionary of objects under consideration” then suggests a “dictionary
of results”, as summarized in Table 2 below. The analogy between the “p-adic
Teichm¨uller theory”of [Mzk1] [and, in particular, the canonical representation con-
structed in this theory] and the upper half-plane uniformization of a hyperbolic
Riemann surface of ﬁnite type is one of the cornerstones of the theory of [Mzk1]; in
particular, a lengthy discussion of this analogy may be found in the Introduction to
[Mzk1]. Also, relative to the issue of “reconstructing the original hyperbolic curve
or Riemann surface”, it is interesting to note that just as Theorem 1.12 does not
require the datum of a logarithmic square diﬀerential, the absoluteness of canon-
ical liftings [cf. [Mzk7], Theorem 3.6] only involves the datum of the logarithmic
special ﬁber — i.e., there is no “choice” of a p-adic lifting involved [just as there is
no “choice” of a complex Teichm¨uller geodesic in Theorem 1.12]. By contrast, just
as the results on the left-hand side of the second and third non-italicized rows of
Table 2do involve the choice of such a complex Teichm¨uller geodesic, the hyperbolic

4 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
curves involved on the right-hand side of the second and third non-italicized rows
of Table 2 require the choice of a p-adic lifting of the logarithmic special ﬁber. As
suggested by the dictionary of Table 1, the “preservation of the metric structure
of the units” [i.e., S1 ⊆ C× or O×
K ⊆ Gab
K ] corresponds to complete reconstruction
of the conformal structure of the Riemann surface or the algebraic structure of
the p-adic curve in the second and third non-italicized rows of Table 2. On the
other hand, reconstruction of the quasiconformal structure of the Riemann surface
[essentially a topological invariant] corresponds, in the ﬁnal row of Table 2, to the
reconstruction of the dual semi-graph [also essentially atopologicalinvariant] of the
logarithmic special ﬁber, in the absence of the “preservation of the metric structure
of the units”. Also, it is interesting to note that the theory of the ﬁrst non-italicized
row of Table 2 is not functorial with respect to ramiﬁed coverings of the Riemann
surface/non-admissible coverings of thep-adic hyperbolic curve, whereas the theory
of the latter three non-italicized rows of Table 2 is functorial with respect to such
coverings.
complex case
 p-adic case
categorical representation
 the canonical representation
via the upper half-plane
 of p-adic Teichm¨uller theory,
uniformization
 the absoluteness of canonical liftings
[cf. Theorem 1.12]
 [cf. [Mzk1]; [Mzk7], Theorem 3.6]
conformal structure via
 relative p-adic proﬁnite version
categories of rectangles
 of the Grothendieck Conjecture
[cf. Theorem 2.3, (iii)]
 [cf. [Mzk4], Theorem A]
conformal structure via
 relative p-adic pro-p version
categories of squares
 of the Grothendieck Conjecture
[cf. Theorem 2.3, (iii)]
 [cf. [Mzk4], Theorem A]
quasiconformal structure
 reconstruction of dual semi-graph
via categories of
 of logarithmic special ﬁber via
parallelograms
 absolute p-adic pro-prime-to-p
[cf. Theorem 2.3, (ii)]
 anabelian geometry or its
tempered analogue
[cf. [Mzk6], Lemma 2.3;
[Mzk11], Corollary 3.11]
Table 2: Dictionary of results
Here, we remark that although it is quite possible that the relative p-adic
proﬁnite [or pro-p] versions of the Grothendieck Conjecture proven in [Mzk4] admit
absolute generalizations [cf., e.g., [Mzk12], Corollary 2.12], if [as on the right-hand
side of the fourth non-italicized row of Table 2] one restricts oneself to the pro-
prime-to-p portion of the geometric fundamental group, then there is no hope [cf.
the unbridgeable gap between conformal and quasiconformal structures!] of recov-
ering the generic ﬁber of the original p-adic curve from the outer Galois action on
the pro-prime-to-p geometric fundamental group, since this outer Galois action is
completely determined by the logarithmic special ﬁber.

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 5
Acknowledgements:
I would like to thankAkio Tamagawa, Makoto Matsumoto,a n dSeidai Yasuda
for many helpful comments concerning the material presented in this paper.

6 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Section 0: Notations and Conventions
Numbers:
The notation Z (respectively, R; C) will be used to denote the set of rational
integers (respectively, real numbers; complex numbers).
Topological Groups:
A homomorphism of topological groups G → H will be called dense if the
image of G is dense in H.
A topological group G will be called tempered [cf. [Mzk11], Deﬁnition 3.1, (i)]
if G is isomorphic, as a topological group, to an inverse limit of an inverse system
of surjections of countable discrete topological groups.
Categories:
Let C be a category. We shall denote by
Ob(C)
the collection of objects of C.I f A ∈ Ob(C)i sa n object of C, then we shall denote
by
CA
the category whose objects are morphisms B → A of C and whose morphisms (from
an object B1 → A to an object B2 → A)a r eA-morphisms B1 → B2 in C.T h u s ,
we have a natural functor
(jA)! : CA →C
(given by forgetting the structure morphism to A).
We shall call an object A ∈ Ob(C) terminal if for every object B ∈ Ob(C),
there exists a unique arrow B → A in C.
We shall refer to a natural transformation between functors all of whose com-
ponent morphisms are isomorphisms as an isomorphism between the functors in
question. A functor φ : C1 →C 2 between categories C1, C2 will be called rigid if φ
has no nontrivial automorphisms. A category C will be called slim if the natural
functor CA →C is rigid, for every A ∈ Ob(C).
A diagram of functors between categories will be called 1 -commutative if the
various composite functors in question areisomorphic. When such a diagram “com-
mutes in the literal sense” we shall say that it 0-commutes. Note that when a dia-
gram in which the various composite functors are allrigid “1-commutes”, it follows
from the rigidity hypothesis that any isomorphism between the composite functors
in question is necessarily unique. Thus, to state that such a diagram 1-commutes

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 7
does not result in any “loss of information” by comparison to the datum of aspeciﬁc
isomorphism between the various composites in question.
We shall say that a nonempty [i.e., non-initial] object A ∈ Ob(C)i s connected
if it is not isomorphic to the coproduct of two nonempty objects ofC.W es h a l ls a y
that an object A ∈ Ob(C)i s mobile (respectively, inﬁnitely mobile) if there exists an
object B ∈ Ob(C) such that the set HomC(A, B)h a scardinality ≥ 2 [i.e., the diag-
onal from this set to the product of this set with itself is not bijective] (respectively,
inﬁnite cardinality). We shall say that an object A ∈ Ob(C)i s quasi-connected if
it is either immobile [i.e., not mobile] or connected. Thus, connected objects are
always quasi-connected. If every object of a category C is quasi-connected,t h e n
we shall say that C is a category of quasi-connected objects. We shall say that a
category C is totally (respectively, almost totally) epimorphic if every morphism
in C whose domain is arbitrary (respectively, nonempty) and whose codomain is
quasi-connected is an epimorphism.
We shall say that C is of ﬁnitely (respectively, countably) connected typeif it is
closed under formation of ﬁnite (respectively, countable) coproducts; every object of
C is a coproduct of a ﬁnite (respectively, countable) collection of connected objects;
and, moreover, all ﬁnite (respectively, countable) coproducts ∐Ai in the category
satisfy the condition that the natural map
∐
HomC(B,A i) → HomC(B,
∐
Ai)
is bijective, for all connected B ∈ Ob(C). If C is of ﬁnitely or countably connected
type, then every nonempty object of C is mobile; in particular, a nonempty object
of C is connected if and only if it is quasi-connected.
If a mobile object A ∈ Ob(C) satisﬁes the condition that every morphism in C
whose domain is nonempty and whose codomain is A is an epimorphism,t h e nA
is connected. [Indeed, C1
∐C2
∼
→ A,w h e r eC1, C2 are nonempty, implies that the
composite map
HomC(A, B) ↪→ HomC(A, B) × HomC(A, B) ↪→ HomC(C1,B ) × HomC(C2,B )
= HomC(C1
∐
C2,B )
∼
→ HomC(A, B)
is bijective, for all B ∈ Ob(C).]
If C is a category of ﬁnitely or countably connected type, then we shall write
C0 ⊆C
for thefull subcategoryof connected objects. [Note, however, that in general, objects
of C0 are not necessarily connected—o re v e nquasi-connected— as objects of C0!]
On the other hand, if, in addition, C is almost totally epimorphic,t h e nC0 is totally
epimorphic, and, moreover, an object of C0 is connected[as an object of C0!] if and
only if [cf. the argument of the preceding paragraph!] it is mobile [as an object of
C0]; in particular, [assuming still that C is almost totally epimorphic!] every object
of C0 is quasi-connected [as an object of C0].

8 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
If C is a category, then we shall write
C⊥ (respectively, C⊤)
for the category formed from C by taking arbitrary “formal” [possibly empty] ﬁnite
(respectively, countable) coproducts of objects in C. That is to say, we deﬁne the
“Hom” of C⊥ (respectively, C⊤) by the formula
Hom(
∐
i
Ai,
∐
j
Bj)
def
=
∏
i
∐
j
HomC(Ai,B j)
[where the Ai, Bj are objects of C]. Thus, C⊥ (respectively, C⊤)i sa category of
ﬁnitely connected type (respectively, category of countably connected type). Note
that objects of C deﬁne connectedobjects of C⊥ or C⊤. Moreover, there are natural
[up to isomorphism] equivalences of categories
(C⊥)0 ∼
→C ;( C⊤)0 ∼
→C ;( D0)⊥ ∼
→D ;( E0)⊤ ∼
→E
if D (respectively, E)i sa category of ﬁnitely connected type (respectively, cate-
gory of countably connected type). If C is a totally epimorphic category of quasi-
connected objects,t h e nC⊥ (respectively, C⊤)i sa n almost totally epimorphic cate-
gory of ﬁnitely (respectively, countably) connected type.
In particular, the operations “0”, “ ⊥” (respectively, “ ⊤”) deﬁne one-to-one
correspondences [up to equivalence] between the totally epimorphic categories of
quasi-connected objectsand the almost totally epimorphic categories of ﬁnitely (re-
spectively, countably) connected type.

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 9
Section 1: Reconstruction via the Upper Half-Plane Uniformization
In this Section, we show that theconformal structureof a hyperbolic Riemann
surface may be functorially reconstructed — by applying the well-known geometry
of the upper half-plane uniformization of the Riemann surface — from a certain
category of localizations naturally associated to the Riemann surface. These cate-
gories of localizations are intended to be reminiscent of — i.e., a sort ofarchimedean
analogue of — the categories of localizations of [Mzk11], §4.
In the following discussion, we shall denote the [Riemann surface constituted
by the] upper half-plane by the notation H. Next, we introduce some terminology:
Deﬁnition 1.1.
(i) We shall refer to a smooth Hausdorﬀ complex analytic stack which admits
an open dense subset isomorphic to a complex manifold and [for simplicity] whose
universal covering is a complex manifold as a complex orbifold.
(ii) We shall refer to a one-dimensional complex orbifold with at most countably
many connected components as aRiemann orbisurface. We shall refer to a Riemann
orbisurface which is a complex manifold [i.e., whose “orbifold structure” is trivial]
as a Riemann surface.
(iii) We shall refer to a Riemann orbisurface as beingof ﬁnite type (respectively,
of almost ﬁnite type ) if it may be obtained as the complement of a ﬁnite subset
(respectively, [possibly inﬁnite] discrete subset) in a compact Riemann orbisurface
(respectively, a Riemann orbisurface of ﬁnite type).
(iv) We shall refer to a connected Riemann orbisurface X (respectively, arbi-
trary Riemann orbisurface X)a sb e i n ga nH-domain if there exists a ﬁnite [i.e.,
proper], surjective ´etale covering X′ → X such that X′ admits an ´etale [i.e., with
derivative everywhere nonzero] holomorphic map X′ → H (respectively, if every
connected component of X is an H-domain).
(v) We shall refer to as an RC-orbifold [i.e., “real complex orbifold”] a pair
X∗ =( X, ιX), where X is a complex orbifold,a n dιX is an anti-holomorphic invo-
lution [i.e., automorphism of order 2]; we shall refer to X as the complexiﬁcation
of the RC-orbifold X∗ [cf. Remark 1.3.1 below]. Moreover, we shall append the
preﬁx “RC-” to the beginning of any of the terms introduced in (i) – (iv) to refer
to RC-orbifolds X∗ =( X, ιX) for which X satisﬁes the conditions of the term in
question.
(vi) An RC-holomorphic map
X → Y
between complex orbifolds X, Y is a map which is either holomorphic or anti-
holomorphic at each point of X.

10 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(vii) A morphism between RC-orbifolds
X∗ =( X, ιX) → Y ∗ =( Y,ιY )
—w h e r eX∗ is connected [i.e., ιX acts transitively on the set of connected compo-
nents of X]—i sa n equivalence class of RC-holomorphic mapsX → Y compatible
with ιX, ιY , where we consider two RC-holomorphic maps equivalent if they diﬀer
by composition with ιX [or, equivalently, ιY ]. A morphism between RC-orbifolds
X∗ =( X, ιX) → Y ∗ =( Y,ιY )
—w h e r eX∗ is not necessarily connected — is the datum of a morphism of RC-
orbifolds from each connected component of X∗ to Y ∗.
Remark 1.1.1. Note that a Riemann orbisurface of ﬁnite type admits a unique
algebraic structure over C. We refer to Lemma 1.3, (iii), for the “RC” analogue of
this statement.
Remark 1.1.2. If X is an H-domain,a n dY → X is an´etale morphism of complex
orbifolds, then it is immediate from the deﬁnitions that Y is also an H-domain.
Remark 1.1.3. If Y → X is a ﬁnite ´ etale covering of connected Riemann
orbisurfaces, then the “symmetric functions” in the various conjugates [i.e., with
respect to the ﬁnite covering Y → X] of any bounded holomorphic function on
Y [e.g., a function arising from a morphism Y → H] give rise to various bounded
holomorphic functions on X which determine,u pt oa ﬁnite indeterminacy, the
original bounded holomorphic function on Y .
Remark 1.1.4. For any morphism of RC-orbifolds
Φ: X∗ =( X, ιX) → Y ∗ =( Y,ιY )
there exists a unique holomorphic map φ : X → Y lying in the equivalence class
that constitutes Φ. Indeed, we may assume without loss of generality that X∗ is
connected.T h e ni fφ1 : X → Y is any RC-holomorphic map lying in Φ, then [since
X∗ — but not necessarily X!— i s connected] φ1 is either holomorphic or anti-
holomorphic. If φ1 is holomorphic (respectively, anti-holomorphic), then we take
φ
def
= φ1 (respectively, φ
def
= ιY ◦φ1 = φ1 ◦ιX).
Proposition 1.2. (Complex Orbifolds as RC-Orbifolds)
(i) Let X be a complex orbifold; write Xc for its complex conjugate [i.e.,
holomorphic functions on Xc are anti-holomorphic functions on X]. Then
R : X ↦→ (X
⋃
Xc,ιR(X))

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 11
—w h e r eιR(X) switches X, Xc via the [anti-holomorphic!] identiﬁcation of their
underlying real analytic stacks — determines a fully faithful functor R from the
category of complex orbifolds and RC-holomorphic mapsinto thecategory
of RC-orbifolds [and morphisms of RC-orbifolds].
(ii) Let X∗ =( X, ιX) be an RC-orbifold. Then there is a natural mor-
phism of RC-orbifolds
R(X) → X∗
—w h i c hi sﬁnite ´etale of degree2 — given by mapping X ⊆ X ⋃Xc (respectively,
Xc ⊆ X ⋃Xc)t o X via the identity map (respectively, ιX).
Proof. Immediate from the deﬁnitions. □
Lemma 1.3. (Removable Singularities)
(i) No H-domain is a Riemann orbisurface of almost ﬁnite type .
(ii) A connected H-domain is necessarily hyperbolic [i.e., its universal cov-
ering is biholomorphic to H].
(iii) Any ﬁnite ´etale RC-holomorphic map X → Y between Riemann orbisur-
faces X, Y of ﬁnite type [each of which, by Remark 1.1.1, admits a unique al-
gebraic structure over C] is necessarily algebraic over R. In particular, every
RC-Riemann orbisurface of ﬁnite type admits a unique algebraic structure over
R.
Proof. Assertion (i) follows immediately [cf. Remark 1.1.3] from the observation
that every bounded holomorphic function on a Riemann orbisurface of almost ﬁnite
type extends to a bounded holomorphic function on a Riemann orbisurface of ﬁnite
type, hence to a bounded holomorphic function on a compact Riemann orbisurface,
which is necessarily constant. Assertion (ii) follows from the same fact, applied to
the case where the Riemann orbisurface of ﬁnite type in question is the complex
plane. Assertion (iii) follows by observing that the properness [i.e., ﬁniteness] as-
sumption implies that this map X → Y extends to the one-point compactiﬁcations
of X, Y — which possess a natural structure of [the stack-theoretic version of]
complex analytic space [i.e., the point at inﬁnity may be singular!] — and then
applying the well-known fact that holomorphic [hence also RC-holomorphic] maps
between algebrizable compact complex analytic spaces are necessarily algebrizable.
□
Remark 1.3.1. Thus, just as complex manifolds are an “analytic analogue” of
smooth schemes overC, RC-manifolds [i.e., “RC-orbifolds” whose stack structure is
trivial] are intended to be ananalytic analogue of smooth schemes over R. Relative
to this analogy, the functor R of Proposition 1.2, (i), is the analogue of the functor
(X
C → C) ↦→ (XC → R)

12 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
that maps a smooth scheme XC over C to the underlying R-scheme. Similarly, the
ﬁrst datum “ X”o fa n RC-complex manifold X∗ =( X, ιX), is the analogue, for a
smooth scheme XR over R, of the associated smooth C-scheme XR ⊗ R C,a n dt h e
´etale double cover of Proposition 1.2, (ii), is the analogue of the ´etale double cover
of smooth R-schemes
XR ⊗ R C → XR
(given by projection to the ﬁrst factor).
Remark 1.3.2. Note that it follows immediately from Lemma 1.3, (iii), that
every Riemann orbisurface of ﬁnite type X admits a canonical compactiﬁcation by
a compact Riemann orbisurface
 X ⊇ X whose “stack structure” is trivial near
X\X. A similar statement holds for RC-Riemann orbisurfaces.
Deﬁnition 1.4. Let X∗ =( X, ιX) be an RC-orbifold. Then:
(i) We shall refer to the set X∗(C) of points of X [i.e., points of the “coarse
complex analytic space” associated to the stack X] as the set of complex points of
X∗.
(ii) We shall refer to the set X∗(R) ⊆ X∗(C) of complex points ﬁxed by ιX as
the set of real points of X∗.
(iii) We shall refer to the setX∗[C]
def
= X∗(C)/ιX of ιX-orbits of complex points
of X∗ as the set of RC-points of X∗.
(iv) We shall refer to H∗ def
= R(H)a st h eRC-upper half-plane. We shall refer
to an “RC- H-domain” [i.e., the “RC” version of an H-domain] as an H∗-domain.
Remark 1.4.1. If X∗ =( X, ιX) is a connected RC-orbifold, then one veriﬁes
easily that X∗(R) admits a natural structure of real analytic orbifold whose real
dimension is equal to the complex dimension of X.
Let X∗ =( X, ιX)b ea n RC-orbifold. Then note that one may consider the
notion of a covering morphism [of RC-orbifolds] Y ∗ =( Y,ιY ) → (X, ιX) [i.e.,
Y → X is a covering morphism, in the usual sense of algebraic topology]. In
particular, if X∗ is connected, then, by considering universal covering morphisms,
we may deﬁne the fundamental group
π1(X∗)
of the RC-orbifold X∗.
Proposition 1.5. (Fundamental Groups of RC-orbifolds) Let X∗ =
(X, ιX) be a connected RC-orbifold.

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 13
(i) If X∗ arises from a complex orbifold, i.e., X∗ = R(X0) [cf. Proposition
1.2, (i)], then we have a natural isomorphism π1(X0)
∼
→ π1(X∗). In this case, we
shall say that X∗ is of complex type.
(ii) If X is connected, then we have a natural exact sequence 1 → π1(X) →
π1(X∗) → Gal(C/R) → 1. Here, the surjection π1(X∗) ↠ Gal(C/R) corresponds
to the double covering of Proposition 1.2, (ii). In this case, we shall say thatX∗ is
of real type.
(iii) Suppose thatX is a hyperbolic Riemann orbisurface.T h e nX∗ ∼= H∗
if and only if π1(X∗)= {1}.
Proof. Assertions (i) and (ii), as well as thenecessity portion of assertion (iii), are
immediate from the deﬁnitions. As for the suﬃciency portion of (iii), we observe
that the condition π1(X∗)= {1} implies, by assertion (ii), that X∗ arises from a
connected Riemann orbisurface X0. Thus, since X = X0
⋃ Xc
0 is hyperbolic,w e
conclude [from the deﬁnition of “hyperbolic”!] that X0 ∼= H,s o X∗ ∼= H∗,a s
desired. □
Next, let us assume thatX∗ is a connected hyperbolic RC-Riemann orbisurface
of ﬁnite type.W r i t eπ1(X∗)∧ for the proﬁnite completion of π1(X∗). Suppose that
we have been given a quotient
π1(X∗)∧ ↠ Π
of proﬁnite groups. Then we may deﬁne a category of (Π-)localizations of X∗
LocΠ(X∗)
as follows: If X∗ =( X, ιX)i sof real type(respectively, of complex type,a n dX0 ⊆ X
is a connected component of X), then the objects
Y ∗ (respectively, Y )
of this category are the RC-Riemann orbisurfaces (respectively, Riemann orbisur-
faces) which are either H∗-domains (respectively, H-domains) or RC-Riemann or-
bisurfaces (respectively, Riemann orbisurfaces) of ﬁnite type that appear as [not
necessarily connected] ﬁnite ´etale coverings of X∗ (respectively, X0) that factor
through the quotient Π. [Here, we recall that by Lemma 1.3, (i), this “either-or” is
mutually exclusive.] The morphisms
Y ∗
1 → Y ∗
2 (respectively, Y1 → Y2)
of this category are arbitrary ´etale morphisms of RC-orbifolds (respectively, arbi-
trary ´etale holomorphic morphisms) which are, moreover, proper and lie over X∗
(respectively, X0) whenever Y ∗
1 , Y ∗
2 (respectively, Y1, Y2)a r eof ﬁnite type .T h u s ,

14 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
by Lemma 1.3, (i), [cf. also Remark 1.1.2] the codomain of any arrow with domain
of ﬁnite type is also of ﬁnite type.
To keep the notation and language simple,e v e nw h e nX∗ is of complex type,
we shall regard the objects and morphisms of this category as RC-orbifolds and
morphisms of RC-orbifolds , via the fully faithful functor R of Proposition 1.2;
moreover, thinking about things in this way renders explicit the independence of
LocΠ(X∗) of the choice of X0, as the notation suggests.
Lemma 1.6. (Basic Categorical Properties) Let φ∗ : Y ∗
1 → Y ∗
2 be a
morphism in LocΠ(X∗).T h e n :
(i) If ψ∗ : Z∗
2 → Y ∗
2 is a morphism inLocΠ(X∗), then the projection morphisms
Y ∗
1 ×Y ∗
2 Z∗
2 → Z∗
2 ; Y ∗
1 ×Y ∗
2 Z∗
2 → Y ∗
1
obtained by forming the ﬁbered product of Y ∗
1 , Z∗
2 over Y ∗
2 in the category of
RC-orbifolds lie in LocΠ(X∗).
(ii) φ∗ is a monomorphism if and only if it factors as the composite of an
isomorphism Y ∗
1
∼
→ Y ∗
3 with an open immersion Y ∗
3 ↪→ Y ∗
2 ,w h e r eY ∗
3 is the object
determined by some open subset of Y ∗
2 [C].
(iii) If Y ∗
1 ̸= ∅,a n dY ∗
2 is a connected RC-orbifold, then φ∗ is an epimor-
phism. In particular, the full subcategory of LocΠ(X∗) consisting of the connected
objects is atotally epimorphic category of quasi-connected objects[cf. §0].
Proof. Assertion (i) is immediate from the deﬁnitions if Y ∗
1 and Z∗
2 are of ﬁnite
type;i fe i t h e rY ∗
1 or Z∗
2 is an H∗-domain, then assertion (i) follows by applying the
observation of Remark 1.1.2. Assertion (ii) may be reduced to the case where Y ∗
2
is of complex type, by base-changing [cf. assertion (i)] via the double covering of
Proposition 1.2, (ii) [applied to Y ∗
2 ]. When Y ∗
2 is of complex type, assertion (ii)
follows immediately from the deﬁnitions, by considering various maps H∗ → Y ∗
2 .
Finally, assertion (iii) follows from the elementary complex analysis fact that a
holomorphic function on a connected domain which vanishes on an open subset is
necessarily identically zero. □
Lemma 1.7. (Inﬁnitely Mobile Opens) Let Y ∗ ∈ Ob(LocΠ(X∗)). Write
LocΠ(X∗)↣
Y ∗ ⊆ LocΠ(X∗)Y ∗
for the full subcategory determined by the objects constituted by arrowsZ∗ → Y ∗
which are monomorphisms.T h e n :
(i) There is a natural fully faithful functor
LocΠ(X∗)↣
Y ∗ ↪→ Open(Y ∗[C])

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 15
[where “Open(−)” denotes the category whose objects are open subsets and whose
morphisms are inclusions of the topological space in parentheses — cf. [Mzk10],
§4] given by assigning to a monomorphism Z∗ ↣ Y ∗ the image of the induced
map Z∗[C] → Y ∗[C]. This functor is an equivalence if and only if Y ∗ is an
H∗-domain.
(ii) If Y ∗ is inﬁnitely mobile [cf. §0] as an object of LocΠ(X∗),t h e nY ∗ is
an H∗-domain.
Proof. First, let us observe the easily veriﬁed — e.g., by cardinality considerations
concerning the set of isomorphism classes of objects ofLocΠ(X∗) which areof ﬁnite
type —f a c tt h a t ,i fY ∗ is of ﬁnite type , then there exist open subsets U ⊆ Y ∗[C]
of the form Y ∗[C]\E,w h e r eE ⊆ Y ∗[C]i sa ﬁnite set ,w h i c hdo not lie in the
essential image of the functor of assertion (i) [cf. Lemma 1.3, (i)]. In light of this
observation, assertion (i) is a formal consequence of Lemma 1.6, (ii); Remark 1.1.2.
Finally, assertion (ii) is an immediate consequence of the deﬁnition of the category
LocΠ(X∗). □
Lemma 1.8. (Category-Theoreticity of the Topological Space of
RC-Points) For i =1 , 2,l e t X∗
i be a connected hyperbolic RC-Riemann
orbisurface of ﬁnite type ; π1(X∗
i )∧ ↠ Πi a quotient.L e t
Φ: LocΠ1 (X∗
1 )
∼
→ LocΠ2 (X∗
2 )
be an equivalence of categories ; Y ∗
i ∈ Ob(LocΠi (X∗
i )); assume that Y ∗
2 =
Φ(Y ∗
1 ).T h e nΦ induces a homeomorphism
Y ∗
1 [C]
∼
→ Y ∗
2 [C]
on the topological spaces of RC-points which is functorial in both Φ and the Y ∗
i .
In particular, Y ∗
1 is of ﬁnite type if and only if Y ∗
2 =Φ (Y ∗
1 ) is of ﬁnite type.
Proof. Note that the inﬁnitely mobile objects are manifestly preserved by Φ and
that H∗ is inﬁnitely mobile. In particular, every object of LocΠi (X∗
i )i s covered by
inﬁnitely mobile opens. Thus, by functoriality [and an evident “gluing argument”],
we may assume, without loss of generality, that the Y ∗
i are inﬁnitely mobile .B u t
then, since the topological spaces Y ∗
i [C] are clearly sober, the existence of a func-
torial homeomorphism as desired [as well as the fact that Φ preserves objects of
ﬁnite type] follows from Lemma 1.7, (i), (ii), together with a well-known result from
“topos theory” [i.e., to the eﬀect that a sober topological space may be recovered
from the category of sheaves on the space — cf., e.g., [Mzk2], Theorem 1.4]. □
Lemma 1.9. (Category-Theoreticity of the Fundamental Group) For
i =1 , 2,l e tX∗
i , Πi, Φ, Y ∗
i be as in Lemma 1.8. ThenΦ preserves the arrows which

16 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
are covering morphisms.I np a r t i c u l a r ,Φ preserves isomorphs of H∗ and, if the
Y ∗
i are connected, induces anisomorphism of groups
π1(Y ∗
1 )
∼
→ π1(Y ∗
2 )
— well-deﬁned up to composition with an inner automorphism —w h i c hi sfunc-
torial in both Φ and the choices of universal covering morphism Z∗
i → Y ∗
i used to
deﬁne the π1’s.
Proof. Indeed, covering morphisms may be characterized by the existence of local
base-changes over which the given morphismsplits as a disjoint union of isomorphs
of the base. Thus, the fact that Φ preserves covering morphisms follows from
Lemmas 1.6, (i); 1.8. The assertion concerning fundamental groups then follows
formally; the assertion concerning isomorphs of H∗ follows from Proposition 1.5,
(iii). □
Lemma 1.10. (Category-Theoreticity of the RC-Orbifold Structure)
For i =1 , 2,l e tX∗
i , Πi, Φ, Y ∗
i be as in Lemma 1.8. Then Φ induces an isomor-
phism of RC-orbifolds
Y ∗
1
∼
→ Y ∗
2
which is functorial in both Φ and the Y ∗
i and compatible with the homeomor-
phisms of Lemma 1.8. In particular, X∗
1 (respectively, Y ∗
1 )i s of real type if and
only if X∗
2 (respectively, Y ∗
2 )i s .
Proof. Indeed, by functoriality, we may assume, without loss of generality, that
the Y ∗
i are connected. Choose universal coverings Z∗
i → Y ∗
i [so Z∗
i ∼= H∗]w h i c h
are compatible with Φ [cf. Lemma 1.9]. Note that we have an exact sequence of
topological groups
1 → SL2(R)/{±1}→ AutRC-orbifolds(H∗) → Gal(C/R) → 1
— where the topology on Aut RC-orbifolds(H∗)i st h a t induced by the action of
AutRC-orbifolds(H∗)o n H∗[C]. In particular, Aut( Z∗
i )
def
=A u tLocΠi(X∗
i )(Z∗
i )i s con-
nectedif and only ifX∗
i is of complex type. Moreover, by Lemmas 1.8, 1.9, Φ induces
a commutative diagram
π1(Y ∗
1 ) ↪→ Aut(Z∗
1 )
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
π
1(Y ∗
2 ) ↪→ Aut(Z∗
2 )
in which thevertical arrowsare isomorphisms of topological groups. Note that since
Aut(Z∗
i )i sa real analytic Lie group, we thus conclude [by Cartan’s theorem—c f . ,
e.g., [Serre], Chapter V, §9, Theorem 2] that the isomorphism Aut(Z∗
1 )
∼
→ Aut(Z∗
2 )
is, in fact, an isomorphism of real analytic Lie groups.
Next, let us choosemaximal connected compact subgroupsKi ⊆ Aut(Z∗
i )w h i c h
are compatible with Φ. Then if X∗
i is of complex type [so Aut(Z∗
i )i s connected],

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 17
then let us write Aut(Z∗
i )0 def
=A u t (Z∗
i ). On the other hand, if X∗
i is of real type,
then we have natural exact sequences
1 → Aut(Z∗
i )0 → Aut(Z∗
i ) → Gal(C/R) → 1
[where the superscript 0 denotes the connected component containing the identity
element] which are compatible with Φ. Whether X∗
i is of real or complex type,
l e tu sw r i t eK0
i
def
= Ki
⋂Aut(Z∗
i )0; Y ∗
i =( Yi,ιYi ). Note that Y ∗
i is of real type if
and only if π1(Y ∗
i ) ⊆ Aut(Z∗
i ) has image ̸= {1} in Aut(Z∗
i )/Aut(Z∗
i )0.I f Y ∗
i is of
real type,t h e nπ1(Yi) ⊆ π1(Y ∗
i ) may be identiﬁed with the kernel of this map to
Aut(Z∗
i )/Aut(Z∗
i )0,a n dYi equipped with its ιYi -action is naturally isomorphic to
Ki\Aut(Z∗
i )/π1(Yi)
[where the “ /”i si nt h e sense of stacks !] equipped with the natural action by
π1(Y ∗
i )/π1(Yi) ∼= Gal(C/R) [from the right]. If Y ∗
i is of complex type,t h e nY ∗
i
is naturally isomorphic to the result of applying the functor “ R” to the Riemann
orbisurface
K0
i \Aut(Z∗
i )0/π1(Y ∗
i )
[where the “/”i si nt h esense of stacks!]. Thus, we conclude that [for X∗
i of real or
complex type] Φ induces an isomorphism of RC-orbifolds Y ∗
1
∼
→ Y ∗
2 , as desired.
That this isomorphism is compatible with the homeomorphisms of Lemma 1.8
follows by comparing the respective induced maps on “points” — where we note
that in the context of Lemma 1.8 (respectively, the present proof), “points” of,
say, Z∗
i , amount to systems of neighborhoods of an element of Z∗
i [C] (respectively,
left cosets of Ki in Aut(Z∗
i )o ro f K0
i in Aut(Z∗
i )0)— by considering the action
of Aut(Z∗
i ), Ki on such systems of neighborhoods. Finally, the functoriality of the
isomorphism Y ∗
1
∼
→ Y ∗
2 with respect to Φ (respectively, theY ∗
i ) is clear (respectively,
a consequence of the compatibility with the homeomorphisms of Lemma 1.8). □
Corollary 1.11. (Preservation of Like Parity) For i =1 , 2,l e t X∗
i , Πi,
Φ, Y ∗
i be as in Lemma 1.8; suppose further that the X∗
i are of real type .L e t
Z∗
i ∈ Ob(LocΠi (X∗
i )); assume that Z∗
2 =Φ (Z∗
1 ), and that the Y ∗
i and Z∗
i are all
connected. Suppose that we are given two morphisms
φi,ψi : Z∗
i → Y ∗
i
in LocΠi (X∗
i ) such that φ2 =Φ (φ1); ψ2 =Φ (ψ1).T h e nφ1, ψ1 have the same
“parity” — i.e., their unique holomorphic representatives[cf. Remark 1.1.4]
induce the same maps on sets of connected components — if and only ifφ2, ψ2 do.
Proof. Immediate from the functorial isomorphisms of RC-orbifolds of Lemma
1.10. □
Theorem 1.12. (Categorical Reconstruction of Hyperbolic RC-Rie-
mann Orbisurfaces) For i =1 , 2,l e t X∗
i be a connected hyperbolic RC-
Riemann orbisurface of ﬁnite type ; π1(X∗
i )∧ ↠ Πi a quotient. Then the

18 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
categories LocΠi (X∗
i ) are slim [cf. §0], and, moreover, any equivalence of cate-
gories
Φ: LocΠ1 (X∗
1 )
∼
→ LocΠ2 (X∗
2 )
is [uniquely] isomorphic [as a functor] to the equivalence induced by a unique
isomorphism of RC-orbifolds X∗
1
∼
→ X∗
2 . That is to say, the natural map
IsomR((X∗
1 , Π1), (X∗
2 , Π2)) → Isom(LocΠ1 (X∗
1 ), LocΠ2 (X∗
2 ))
from isomorphisms of RC-orbifolds X∗
1
∼
→ X∗
2 which admit [uniquely determined,
up to inner automorphisms arising fromπ1(X∗
i ) — cf. Lemma 1.9] compatible iso-
morphisms Π1
∼
→ Π2 to isomorphism classes of equivalences between the categories
LocΠi (X∗
i ) is bijective.
Proof. Indeed, slimness follows, for instance, by considering the functorial home-
omorphisms of Lemma 1.8, while the asserted bijectivity follows formally from the
functorial isomorphisms of RC-orbifolds of Lemma 1.10. Here, we note that the
object X∗
i of LocΠi (X∗
i ) may be characterized, up to isomorphism, as the object of
ﬁnite type [cf. Lemma 1.8] which forms a terminal object in the full subcategory of
LocΠi (X∗
i ) determined by the objects of ﬁnite type. □
Corollary 1.13. (Induced Isomorphisms of Quotients of Proﬁnite Fun-
damental Groups) In the notation of Theorem 1.12, the isomorphism
Π1
∼
→ Π2
induced by Φ [well-deﬁned up to composition with an inner automorphism of Πi]
is independent of the choice of Φ,u pt ot h egeometrically-induced automor-
phisms of Πi — i.e., the automorphisms arising from the automorphisms of the
RC-orbifold X∗
i that preserve the quotient π1(X∗
i )∧ ↠ Πi.
Proof. A formal consequence of Theorem 1.12. □

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 19
Section 2: Categories of Parallelograms, Rectangles, and Squares
In this Section, we show that thequasiconformal (respectively, conformal; con-
formal) structure of a connected hyperbolic RC-Riemann orbisurface of ﬁnite type
may be functorially reconstructed from a certain category ofparallelogram(respec-
tively, rectangle; square) localizations. Although, just as was the case with the
categories of §1, these categories of localizations are intended to be reminiscent of
the categories of localizations of [Mzk11], §4, they diﬀer from the categories of §1
in the following crucial way: They admit terminal objects [cf. the categories of
[Mzk11], §4, which also, essentially, admit terminal objects, up to ﬁnitely many
automorphisms, or, alternatively, the categories called temperoids of [Mzk11], §3].
Deﬁnition 2.1.
(i) We shall refer to a connected hyperbolic Riemann (respectively, RC-Riemann)
orbisurface as a punctured torus (respectively, punctured RC-torus) if it (respec-
tively, each connected component of its complexiﬁcation) arises as the complement
of a ﬁnite, nonempty subset of a one-dimensional complex torus [i.e., the Riemann
surface associated to an elliptic curve over C]. If this ﬁnite subset is a translate of
a subgroup of the complex torus (respectively, is of cardinality one), then we shall
refer to the punctured torus (respectively, punctured RC-torus) as beingof torsion
type (respectively, once-punctured).
(ii) Let
 Y be a compact connected Riemann orbisurface; Y ⊆
 Y the Riemann
orbisurface of ﬁnite type obtained by removing some ﬁnite set S of points from
 Y .
[Thus, by Lemma 1.3, (iii),
 Y is completely determined by Y .] Then we shall refer
to as a logarithmic square diﬀerential on Y a section φ over Y of the line bundle
ω⊗2
Y [where ωY is the holomorphic line bundle of diﬀerentials on Y ] which extends
to a section over
 Y of the line bundle ω⊗2
Y (S)[ w h e r eω
Y is the holomorphic line
bundle of diﬀerentials on
 Y ; we use the notation S to denote the reduced eﬀective
divisor on
 Y determined by the set S]. The noncritical locus
Ynon ⊆ Y
of a logarithmic square diﬀerentialφ on Y is deﬁned to be the Riemann orbisurface
of points at which φ ̸=0 ;t h euniversalization of a logarithmic square diﬀerentialφ
on Y is deﬁned to be the universal covering Y
 non → Ynon of the noncritical locus
Ynon of φ. As is well-known [cf., e.g., [Lehto], Chapter IV, §6.1], if φ ̸≡ 0 [i.e., φ is
not identically zero], then the path integral of the square root ofφ over Y
 non
∫ √
φ
determines a “natural parameter”
zφ : Y
 non → C

20 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
on Y
 non, which is independent of the choice of square root and the choice of a
basepoint for the integral, up to multiplication by ±1a n daddition of a constant.
In particular, it makes sense to deﬁne a φ-parallelogram (respectively, φ-rectangle;
φ-square)o f Y
 non to be an open subset or Y
 non [or, by abuse of terminology,
the associated Riemann surface] that maps bijectively via zφ onto a parallelogram
(respectively, rectangle; square) of C, in the sense of Deﬁnition A.3, (i), (ii), of the
Appendix. We shall refer to a φ-parallelogram as pre-compact if it is contained in
a compact subset of Y
 non.
(iii) A logarithmic square diﬀerentialφ∗ on a connected RC-Riemann orbisur-
face of ﬁnite type X∗ is deﬁned to be a logarithmic square diﬀerential φ on [each
connected component of] the complexiﬁcation of X∗ which is preserved by the anti-
holomorphic involution of X∗. Given a logarithmic square diﬀerential φ∗ on X∗,
the noncritical locus (respectively, universalization; natural parameters [whenever
φ ̸≡ 0]) associated to the corresponding logarithmic square diﬀerential on the com-
plexiﬁcation of X∗ thus determine a noncritical locus X∗
non ⊆ X∗ (respectively,
universalization X
∗
non → X∗
non; natural parameters zφ∗ : X
∗
non[C] → C) associated
to φ∗. Here, any two natural parameters zφ∗ , z′
φ∗ are related to one another as
follows: z′
φ∗ is equal to either ±zφ∗ + λ,f o rs o m eλ ∈ C, or the complex conjugate
of this expression. In particular, we obtain a notion of φ∗-parallelograms (respec-
tively, φ∗-rectangles; φ∗-squares; pre-compact φ∗-parallelograms) associated to φ∗
[all of which are to be regarded as RC-Riemann surfaces over X
∗
non].
(iv) Let Y , Z be Riemann orbisurfaces of ﬁnite type. If Y , Z are connected,
then we shall refer to a map Y → Z as anti-quasiconformal (respectively, anti-
Teichm¨uller) if it is quasiconformal (respectively, a Teichm¨ uller mapping — cf.
Remark 2.1.1 below) with respect to the holomorphic structure on Y given by
the holomorphic functions and the holomorphic structure on Z given by the anti-
holomorphic functions. If Y , Z are not necessarily connected, then we shall refer to
am a pY → Z as RC-quasiconformal(respectively,RC-Teichm¨uller) if its restriction
to each connected component ofY determines a map to some connected component
of Z that is either quasiconformal or anti-quasiconformal (respectively, either a
Teichm¨uller mapping or an anti-Teichm¨uller mapping).
(v) LetY ∗ =( Y,ιY ), Z∗ =( Z,ιZ) be connected RC-Riemann orbisurfaces of ﬁ-
nite type. Then we shall refer to as an RC-quasiconformal morphism (respectively,
RC-Teichm¨uller morphism) Y ∗ → Z∗ an equivalence class of RC-quasiconformal
(respectively, RC-Teichm¨uller) maps Y → Z compatible with ιY , ιZ,w h e r ew e
consider two such maps equivalent if they diﬀer by composition with ιY [or, equiv-
alently, ιZ]. If Π Y ,Π Z are tempered topological groups,a n d
π1(Y ∗) → ΠY ; π1(Z∗) → ΠZ
are dense [cf. §0] morphisms of tempered [cf. §0] topological groups [i.e., we think
of π1(Y ∗), π1(Z∗) as being equipped with the discrete topology, soπ1(Y ∗), π1(Z∗)
are tempered topological groups], then we shall say that an RC-quasiconformal
morphism Y ∗ → Z∗ is (Π Y , ΠZ)-compatible if there exists a [necessarily unique,
by the “dense-ness” assumption] isomorphism Π Y
∼
→ ΠZ that is compatible [in

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 21
the evident sense] with the outer isomorphism π1(Y ∗)
∼
→ π1(Z∗) induced by the
RC-quasiconformal morphism Y ∗ → Z∗.
(vi) A Teichm¨uller pair (X, φ) (respectively, RC-Teichm¨uller pair (X∗,φ∗)) is
deﬁned to be a pair consisting of a connected hyperbolic Riemann (respectively,
RC-Riemann) orbisurface of ﬁnite type X (respectively, X∗) and a non-identically
zero logarithmic square diﬀerential φ (respectively, φ∗)o n X (respectively, X∗).
Remark 2.1.1. We refer to [Lehto], Chapter V, §7, §8, for more on the theory
of Teichm¨uller mappings between Riemann orbisurfaces of ﬁnite type. Note that
although the theory of Teichm¨uller mappings is typically only developed forcompact
Riemann surfaces, it extends immediately to the case of an arbitrary Riemann
orbisurface of ﬁnite type Y by passing to an appropriateGalois ﬁnite ´etale covering
Z → Y which extends to a ramiﬁed covering of compact Riemann orbisurfaces
Z →
 Y ,w h e r e
Z is a Riemann surface, and
Z →
 Y is ramiﬁed at every point of
Z\Z.
[Indeed, the ramiﬁcation condition implies that a logarithmic square diﬀerential on
Y pulls back to a logarithmic square diﬀerential on Z which extends to a square
diﬀerential without poles on
 Z.]
Remark 2.1.2. Let Φ : Y ∗ → Z∗ be an RC-quasiconformal morphism (re-
spectively, RC-Teichm¨uller morphism ), as in Deﬁnition 2.1, (v) [so Y ∗, Z∗ are
connected]. Then [cf. Remark 1.1.4] there exists a unique quasiconformal map (re-
spectively, Teichm¨uller mapping) φ : Y → Z lying in the equivalence class that
constitutes Φ.
Remark 2.1.3. One important example of an RC-Teichm¨uller pair
(X∗,φ∗)
is the case where X∗ admits a ﬁnite ´etale covering Y ∗ → X∗ such that Y ∗ is a
punctured RC-torus of complex type, and the square diﬀerentialφ∗|Y ∗ extends to a
square diﬀerential on thecanonical compactiﬁcation [cf. Remark 1.3.2] of Y ∗. Note
that in this case,φ∗ is completely determined,u pt oa nonzero constant multiple.I n
the following, we shall refer to such a pair astoral. Note that if Z∗ → X∗ is also a
ﬁnite ´etale covering of X∗ by a punctured RC-torus of complex type Z∗ such that
φ∗|Z∗ extends to a square diﬀerential on the canonical compactiﬁcation ofZ∗ —i n
which case we shall say thatZ∗ → X∗ is toralizing — then one veriﬁes immediately
[by considering thenatural parametersassociated toφ∗] that there exists a toralizing
ﬁnite ´etale covering W ∗ → X∗ that dominates the coverings Y ∗ → X∗, Z∗ → X∗.
In particular, it follows that there exists a unique [up to not necessarily unique
isomorphism] “minimal toralizing ﬁnite ´etale covering”Y ∗
min → X∗ [i.e., such that
every other toralizing ﬁnite ´etale covering Y ∗ → X∗ factors through Y ∗
min → X∗].
Let (X∗ =( X, ιX),φ ∗)b ea nRC-Teichm¨uller pair. Suppose that we have been
given a tempered topological groupΠa n da dense morphism
π1(X∗) → Π

22 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
of tempered topological groups. Thus, for every open subgroup H ⊆ Π, the induced
morphism π1(X∗) → Π/H is surjective. Let us refer to a connected covering of X∗
as being a Π-covering if it appears as a subcovering of the covering determined by
such a quotient π1(X∗) ↠ Π/H. In the following, we shall also make the following
two assumptions on Π:
(1) “Π is totally ramiﬁed at inﬁnity”in the sense that there existGalois ﬁnite
Π-coverings of X∗ which are ramiﬁed over every point of the canonical
compactiﬁcation [cf. Remark 1.3.2]
 X
∗
⊇ X∗ which is not contained in
X∗.
(2) “Π is stack-resolving” in the sense that there exist Galois ﬁnite Π-
coverings of X∗ which are of complex type and whose “stack structure” is
trivial.
Now we deﬁne the category of parallelogram (Π-)localizations of (X∗,φ∗)
LocP
Π (X∗,φ∗)
as follows: The objects
Z∗
of this category are the RC-Riemann orbisurfaces which are either pre-compact
φ∗-parallelograms of the universalization X
∗
non or RC-Riemann orbisurfaces that
appear as connected [but not necessarily ﬁnite] Π-coverings of X∗. Objects of the
former type will be referred to asparallelogram objects; objects of the latter type will
be referred to ascomplete objects. A parallelogram object deﬁned by a φ∗-rectangle
(respectively, φ∗-square) will be referred to as arectangle object(respectively,square
object). A complete object that arises from a ﬁnite covering of X∗ will be referred
to as a ﬁnite object.T h emorphisms
Z∗
1 → Z∗
2
of this category arearbitrary ´etale morphisms of RC-orbifolds overX∗ which, more-
over, satisfy the property that if Z∗
1 is a parallelogram object,t h e neither the given
arrow Z∗
1 → Z∗
2 is an isomorphism of RC-orbifoldsor the given arrowZ∗
1 → Z∗
2 has
pre-compact image [i.e., the image of Z∗
1 [C] lies inside a compact subset of Z∗
2 [C]].
Similarly, we deﬁne the category of rectangle (Π-)localizations of (X∗,φ∗)
LocR
Π (X∗,φ∗)
to be the full subcategory of LocP
Π (X∗,φ∗) determined by the objects which areei-
ther complete objectsor rectangle objects, and thecategory of square (Π-)localizations
of (X∗,φ∗)
LocS
Π (X∗,φ∗)
to be the full subcategory of LocP
Π (X∗,φ∗) determined by the objects which are
either complete objects or square objects.

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 23
Observe that whenX∗ is of complex type, and we think of the objectsZ∗ → X∗
of LocP
Π (X∗,φ∗) as being endowed with the “holomorphic structure” determined
by a connected component X0 ⊆ X, then all of the morphisms Z∗
1 → Z∗
2 of
LocP
Π (X∗,φ∗) induce holomorphic morphisms between the connected components
of the complexiﬁcations of Z∗
1 , Z∗
2 lying over X0 [cf. Remark 1.1.4]. Put another
way, in this case, the categoryLocP
Π (X∗,φ∗) may be thought of as the image via the
fully faithful functor R of Proposition 1.2 of a certain category ofholomorphic mor-
phisms between Riemann orbisurfaces. A similar statement holds forLocR
Π (X∗,φ∗),
LocS
Π (X∗,φ∗).
Proposition 2.2. (Basic Categorical Properties) Let □ be either “P”, “R”,
or “ S”. Then:
(i) The result of applying “ ⊤” to the full subcategory of Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗) deter-
mined by the complete objects is a connected temperoid [cf. [Mzk11], Deﬁni-
tion 3.1, (ii)], with tempered fundamental group isomorphic to Π. In particular, it
makes sense to speak of complete objects as being Galois [cf. [Mzk11], Deﬁnition
3.1, (iv)].
(ii) The codomain of any arrow of Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗) with complete domain is
also complete.
(iii) An objectZ∗ of Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗) is complete if and only if every monomor-
phism Z∗ ↣ W ∗ [in Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗)] is an isomorphism.
(iv) The object of Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗) determined by X∗ is a terminal object of
the category Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗).
(v) The category Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗) is a totally epimorphic category of quasi-
connected objects [cf. §0].
(vi) The automorphism groupAut(Z∗) of a complete objectZ∗ of Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗)
is isomorphic to a subquotient of a group of the form Π/H,w h e r eH ⊆ Π is an
open subgroup.
(vii) If Z∗ is a parallelogram object of Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗), then every endomor-
phism of Z∗ [in Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗)]i sa n automorphism, and, moreover, the auto-
morphism group Aut(Z∗) [of Z∗ as a object of Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗)]i s ﬁnite .
(viii) Every morphismZ∗
1 → Z∗
2 betweenparallelogram objects of Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗)
is a monomorphism.
(ix) Every monomorphism Z∗
1 → Z∗
2 of Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗) which is not an iso-
morphism factors as a compositeZ∗
1 → Z∗
3 → Z∗
2 of non-isomorphisms Z∗
1 → Z∗
3 ,
Z∗
3 → Z∗
2 ,w h e r eZ∗
1 , Z∗
3 are parallelogram objects.
Proof. Assertions (i), (iv), (v), (vi) are immediate from the deﬁnitions [cf. also
the proof of Lemma 1.6, (iii), in the case of assertion (v)]. To prove assertion

24 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(ii), let Z∗ → Y ∗ be an arrow such that Z∗ is complete, but Y ∗ is not complete.
Thus, Y ∗ is a parallelogram object, and the morphism Z∗ → Y ∗ is over X∗, hence
over X∗
non. In particular, we conclude that X∗
non = X∗. Note, moreover, that
Z∗ → X∗ is a covering morphism which [outside of the categoryLoc□
Π (X∗,φ∗)] is a
subcovering of the coveringX
∗
non → X∗. In particular, if webase-change over X∗ by
X
∗
non → X∗, we obtain [since Y ∗ is simply connected] a morphism X
∗
non → Y ∗ over
X
∗
non, which is absurd [since, for instance, Y ∗[C], unlike X
∗
non[C], has pre-compact
image in X
∗
non[C]]. In light of assertion (ii), assertion (iii) is immediate from our
pre-compactness assumption in the deﬁnition of the morphisms of Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗)
with parallelogram domain[together with the observation that morphisms between
complete objects are always covering morphisms, hence are monomorphisms if and
only if they are isomorphisms].
Next, we consider endomorphisms of parallelogram objects, i.e., assertion (vii).
First, let us observe that pulling back the standard volume form onC via a natural
parameteryields a volume form μX
non on X
∗
non[C] that is compatible with theaﬃne
linear structure on X
∗
non[C] determined by the natural parameters, and, moreover,
is held ﬁxed by Gal(X
∗
non/X∗
non) [since automorphisms of Gal( X
∗
non/X∗
non) ﬁx φ∗,
hence map natural parameters associated toφ∗ to natural parameters associated to
φ∗]. In particular, since all morphisms of Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗)a r eover X∗, it follows that
μX
non (respectively, the aﬃne linear structure on X
∗
non[C]) determines a volume
form μZ (respectively, aﬃne linear structure )o n Z∗[C] that is compatible with
all endomorphisms of Z∗. Thus, the fact that every endomorphism of Z∗ is an
automorphism follows immediately from the [easily veriﬁed, elementary] fact that
every volume-preserving, aﬃne linear automorphism ofC that maps a parallelogram
of X
non into itself necessarily induces a bijection of this parallelogram onto itself.
Moreover, it is immediate [for instance, by considering the induced bijections of
edges and vertices of the closure of the parallelogram] that the group of aﬃne
linear automorphisms of this parallelogram that arise in this fashion is ﬁnite .
Next, we consider assertion (viii). First, observe that any two morphismsZ∗
i →
X
∗
non [where i =1 , 2] that arise from lifting morphisms Z∗
i → X∗ of Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗)
diﬀer by composition with an element of Gal(X
∗
non/X∗
non), and that it is immediate
from the deﬁnitions that there exist such morphisms Z∗
i → X
∗
non which are open
immersions. In particular, it follows that every morphism Z∗
i → X
∗
non that arises
from lifting a morphism Z∗
i → X∗ of Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗), hence, in particular, every
composite Z∗
1 → Z∗
2 → X
∗
non of such a lifted morphism Z∗
2 → X
∗
non with an
arbitrary morphism Z∗
1 → Z∗
2 of Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗)i sa n open immersion.T h u s , i t
follows immediately that any morphism Z∗
1 → Z∗
2 is a monomorphism, as desired.
Finally, we consider assertion (ix). First, we recall that it is immediate from
the deﬁnition of a “connected temperoid” [cf. [Mzk11], Deﬁnition 3.1, (ii)] that any
monomorphism between connected objects of a connected temperoid is, in fact, an
isomorphism. Thus, it follows from assertion (i) that Z∗
1 is a parallelogram object.
If Z∗
2 is also a parallelogram object, then it follows immediately from our pre-
compactness assumption in the deﬁnition of the morphisms of Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗)w i t h
parallelogram domain that Z∗
1 → Z∗
2 admits a factorization of the desired type.
If, on the other hand, Z∗
2 is complete, then [as discussed above], the morphism

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 25
Z∗
1 → Z∗
2 factors as a composite Z∗
1 → X
∗
non → Z∗
2 . Now since the image of
the morphism Z∗
1 → X
∗
non is [by the deﬁnition of the “parallelogram objects” of
Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗)] pre-compact, it follows immediately that the morphism Z∗
1 → X
∗
non
factors as a composite Z∗
1 → Z∗
3 → X
∗
non,w h e r eZ∗
1 → Z∗
3 is a non-isomorphism of
Loc□
Π (X∗,φ∗) between parallelogram objects, andZ∗
3 → X
∗
non is an open immersion.
Thus, by composing the arrow Z∗
3 → X
∗
non with the arrow X
∗
non → Z∗
2 , we obtain
a factorization Z∗
1 → Z∗
3 → Z∗
2 of the desired type. This completes the proof of
assertion (ix). □
Theorem 2.3. (Categorical Reconstruction of the Quasiconformal or
Conformal Structure of an RC-Teichm¨uller pair) For i =1 , 2,l e t(X∗
i ,φ∗
i
)
be an RC-Teichm¨uller pair; Πi a tempered topological group;
π1(X∗
i ) → Πi
a dense [cf. §0] morphism of tempered [cf. §0] topological groups such
that Πi is “totally ramiﬁed at inﬁnity” and “stack-resolving” [cf. the above
discussion]. Then:
(i) The categories LocP
Πi (X∗
i ,φ∗
i
), LocR
Πi (X∗
i ,φ∗
i
), LocS
Πi (X∗
i ,φ∗
i
) are slim [cf.
§0].
(ii) There is a naturalbijection between isomorphism classes ofequivalences
of categories
Φ: LocP
Π1 (X∗
1 ,φ∗
1
)
∼
→ LocP
Π2 (X∗
2 ,φ∗
2
)
and (Π1, Π2)-compatible RC-Teich-m¨uller morphisms
X∗
1
∼
→ X∗
2
that “map” φ∗
1 to a nonzero complex multiple of φ∗
2 [i.e., φ∗
1 (respectively, some
nonzero complex multiple of φ∗
2)i st h e“initial” (respectively, “terminal”) dif-
ferential of the RC-Teichm¨uller morphism — cf., e.g., [Lehto], Chapter V, The-
orem 8.1]. Moreover, this bijection is obtained by considering the equivalence of
categories naturally induced by such an RC-Teichm¨uller morphism X∗
1
∼
→ X∗
2 .
(iii) There is a natural bijection between isomorphism classes of equiva-
lences of categories
Φ: LocR
Π1 (X∗
1 ,φ∗
1
)
∼
→ LocR
Π2 (X∗
2 ,φ∗
2
)
and (Π1, Π2)-compatible isomorphisms of RC-orbisurfaces
X∗
1
∼
→ X∗
2
that map φ∗
1 to a nonzero complex multiple of φ∗
2. Moreover, this bijection is ob-
tained by considering the equivalence of categories naturally induced by such an iso-
morphism of RC-orbisurfaces X∗
1
∼
→ X∗
2 . A similar statement holds when “ LocR”
is replaced by “LocS”.

26 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Proof. First, let us observe that it is immediate from the deﬁnitions that an
isomorphism X∗
1 → X∗
2 of the type stated in assertions (ii), (iii), induces an equiva-
lence of categories between the respective categories “Loc□”[ w h e r e□ is “ P”, “R”,
or “ S”]. [In the case of RC-Teichm¨uller morphisms, this follows immediately from
the manifestly aﬃne linear explicit local form of a Teichm¨uller mapping — cf., e.g.,
[Lehto], Chapter V, Theorem 8.1.] In particular, we note that the deﬁnition of each
of these categories is unaﬀected by multiplying φ∗ by a nonzero complex number.
Next, let us suppose that we have been given an equivalence Φ between the
respective categories “Loc□”. Write C
def
= Loc□
Πi (X∗
i ,φ∗
i
). Let us refer to an ordered
set which is isomorphic, as an ordered set, to the set of natural numbers [equipped
with its usual ordering] as a naturally ordered set.I f W ∗ ∈ Ob(C), then let us refer
to as a P-system [i.e., a “system of parallelograms”] over W ∗ a projective system
Z = {Z∗
j }j∈J
... → Z∗
j′ → ... → Z∗
j → ...
in CW ∗ , indexed by a naturally ordered setJ, such that: (a) each object Z∗
j → W ∗
of this system is an arrow of C whose domain Z∗
j is a parallelogram; (b) no arrow
Z∗
j′ → Z∗
j is an isomorphism. Recall from Proposition 2.2, (viii), that every arrow
Z∗
j′ → Z∗
j is a monomorphism. There is an evident notion of morphisms between
P-systems over W ∗ [i.e., morphisms of projective systems]. We shall call a P-
system Z over W ∗ minimal if every morphism of P-systems [over W ∗] Z′ →Z is
an isomorphism.
Let Z = {Z∗
j }j∈J be a P-system over W ∗. Then it follows from our pre-
compactness assumption in the deﬁnition of the morphisms of “ Loc□”w i t hparal-
lelogram domain that if we denote the closure of the subset
Zj
def
=I m (Z∗
j [C]) ⊆ W
def
= W ∗[C]
by Kj ⊆ W,t h e nKj is compact; moreover, we have an equality
Z∞
def
=
⋂
j∈J
Zj =
⋂
j∈J
Kj ⊆ W
of subsets of W. Now suppose that for each j ∈ J, zj ∈ Zj;l e tz ∈ W be a cluster
point of the set {zj }j∈J [i.e., some subsequence of the sequence constituted by the
zj converges to z]. [Note that since the Kj are compact, such a cluster point always
exists.] Then I claim that z ∈ Z∞ . Indeed, we may assume [by replacing J by
a coﬁnal subset of J]t h a tzj → z.T h e n i f w e w r i t eAj
def
= {zj′ }j′ ≥j
⋃{z},t h e n
Aj ⊆ Kj,s o
z ∈
⋂
j∈J
Aj ⊆
⋂
j∈J
Kj = Z∞
as desired. In particular, since theZj are nonempty, it follows thatZ∞ is nonempty.
Now I claim that Z = {Z∗
j }j∈J is minimal if and only if the cardinality |Z∞ |
of the set Z∞ is equal to 1. Indeed, if |Z∞ | > 1, then it is immediate that one can

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 27
construct a morphism of P-systems Z′ →Z such that Z′
∞ ⫋ Z∞ [where Z′
∞ is the
analogue of “ Z∞ ”f o rZ′], so Z′ →Z is not an isomorphism of P-systems. On the
other hand, suppose that |Z∞ | = 1. Now since the topological space W is clearly
metrizable, let us assume that it is equipped with a metric d(−, −). Let
Z′ = {Z∗
j′ }j′∈J ′ →Z = {Z∗
j }j∈J
be a morphism of P-systems over W ∗.T h u s ,Z′
∞ = Z∞ .W r i t eZ∞ = {z}.T h e n
observe that for every real ϵ> 0, there exists a j0 ∈ J such that for all j ≥ j0, Zj
is contained in the set B(z,ϵ )
def
= {w ∈ W | d(z,w ) <ϵ }. Indeed, if this were false,
then it would follow that for every [suﬃciently large, hence every]j ∈ J, there exist
aj,b j ∈ Zj such that d(aj,b j) ≥ ϵ. Moreover, by choosing the aj, bj appropriately,
we may assume that aj → a, bj → b,f o rs o m ea, b ∈ W. But by our discussion of
cluster points in the preceding paragraph, it thus follows thata = b = z, hence that
ϵ ≤ d(aj,b j) → d(a, b) = 0, which is absurd. Thus, we conclude that Zj ⊆ B(z,ϵ )
for suﬃciently large j ∈ J. On the other hand, since, given a j′ ∈ J′, there exists
an ϵ> 0 such that B(z,ϵ ) ⊆ Z′
j′ , it thus follows immediately that Z′ →Z is an
isomorphism, thus proving the asserted minimality of Z.
Thus, in summary, we conclude that:
There is a natural bijective correspondence between the set W ∗[C]non
[where the subscript “non” denotes the open subset determined by the
noncricital locus]a n dt h eset of isomorphism classes of minimal P-systems
over W ∗.
In particular, since, by Proposition 2.2, (iii), Φ preserves parallelogram objects, we
conclude that Φ induces natural bijections
W ∗
1 [C]non
∼
→ W ∗
2 [C]non
[where, fori =1 , 2, W ∗
i ∈ Ob(LocP
Πi
(X∗
i ,φ∗
i
)), Φ(W ∗
1 )= W ∗
2 ] which arefunctorial in
the W ∗
i . Moreover, since the images of parallelograms inW ∗
i [C] clearly form abasis
for the topology of W ∗
i [C], we conclude [by considering collections of isomorphism
classes of P-systems over W ∗
i that factor through some given ﬁxed parallelogram
over W ∗
i ] that these bijections are, in fact, homeomorphisms.
Note that these functorial homeomorphisms are already suﬃcient to conclude
that the category C is slim [cf. the proof of slimness in Theorem 1.12 via Lemma
1.8]. This completes the proof of assertion (i).
Next, let us observe that it follows from our assumption that Π i is “stack-
resolving” that there exist ﬁnite Galois [cf. Proposition 2.2, (i)] W ∗
i such that
Φ(W ∗
1 )= W ∗
2 , and, moreover,W ∗
i is of complex type,w i t htrivial “stack structure”.
Thus, it follows, by applying Proposition A.4 [of the Appendix] to suﬃciently small
pre-compact parallelogram neighborhoods of W ∗
i [C], that, in the case of assertion
(ii) (respectively, (iii)), the functorial homeomorphism
W ∗
1 [C]non
∼
→ W ∗
2 [C]non

28 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
constructed above is locally aﬃne linear (respectively, locally aﬃne ortho-linear ).
Now in the aﬃne linear case, it follows from Proposition A.1 [of the Appendix],
together with the explicit local form of a Teichm¨uller mapping [cf., e.g., [Lehto],
Chapter V, §7a n d§8, especially Theorem 8.1] that there exists anRC-Teichm¨uller
mapping with domain W ∗
1 [C]non and initial diﬀerentiala nonzero complex multiple
of the pull-back to W ∗
1 [C]non of φ∗
1 [which is well-deﬁned up to possible confusion
with its complex conjugate] such that the RC-holomorphic structure induced on
this domain [via this RC-Teichm¨uller mapping] by the RC-holomorphic structure
of the codomain coincides with the RC-holomorphic structure induced, via the
above functorial homeomorphism, by the RC-holomorphic structure of W
∗
2 [C]non.
In particular, this functorial homeomorphism factors as the composite of an RC-
Teichm¨uller mapping which induces the identity map on the underlying real analytic
manifolds with an isomorphism of RC-Riemann orbisurfaces. That is to say, the
functorial homeomorphism considered above is an RC-Teichm¨uller mapping, as de-
sired, hence extends naturally to the canonical compactiﬁcations [cf. Remark 1.3.2]
of the W ∗
i [C]non. Moreover, the functoriality of this homeomorphism [together with
the fact that W ∗
i is of complex typewith trivial “stack structure”] allows one tode-
scend the RC-Teichm¨uller mapping just obtained between the canonical compact-
iﬁcations of the W ∗
i [C]non to an RC-Teichm¨uller mapping between the canonical
compactiﬁcations of the X∗
i , hence [by our assumption that Π i is totally ramiﬁed
at inﬁnity ]t oa nR C - T e i c h m ¨uller mapping
X∗
1
∼
→ X∗
2
thus completing the proof of assertion (ii). [Here, we note in passing that X∗
i is of
complex type if and only if the automorphisms of W ∗
i [C]non induced by elements of
Gal(W ∗
i /X∗
i ) preserve some orientation of the aﬃne linear structure.] The aﬃne
ortho-linear case follows similarly [but is somewhat easier, since it does not involve
any Teichm¨uller theory!]. This completes the proof of assertion (iii). □
Corollary 2.4. (The Type of a Finite Object) In the notation of Theorem
2.3, let
Φ: Loc□
Π1 (X∗
1 ,φ∗
1
)
∼
→ Loc□
Π2 (X∗
2 ,φ∗
2
)
[where □ is “P”, “R”, or “S”] be anequivalence of categories. Suppose further
that, for i =1 , 2, W ∗
i is a ﬁnite object of Loc□
Πi (X∗
i ,φ∗
i
) such that Φ(W ∗
1 )= W ∗
2 .
Then:
(i) W ∗
1 is of complex type if and only if W ∗
2 is.
(ii) The “stack structure” of W ∗
1 is trivial if and only if the same is true of
W ∗
2 .
(iii) Suppose that the “stack structure” of W ∗
i is trivial, and that W ∗
i is of
complex type; write
 W
∗
i for the canonical compactiﬁcation [cf. Remark 1.3.2]
of W ∗
i . Then the genus of
 W
∗
i ,a sw e l la st h ecardinality of the set
 W
∗
i \W ∗
i is
independent of i. If, moreover, this genus is equal to 1, then the pair (W ∗
1 ,φ∗
1
|W ∗
1 )

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 29
is toral [cf. Remark 2.1.3] (respectively, and W ∗
1 is of torsion type)i fa n do n l y
if the same is true of (W ∗
2 ,φ∗
2
|W ∗
2 ) (respectively, and W ∗
2 ).
Proof. All of these assertions follow formally from Theorem 2.3, (ii), (iii). Here,
we note that in the genus 1 case, “torality” is [easily veriﬁed to be] equivalent to
the condition that the natural parameters [arising from the aﬃne linear structure]
extend to neighborhoods of the “points at inﬁnity” of the canonical compactiﬁca-
tion. Once one has established “torality”, the property of being of torsion type
is completely determined by the aﬃne linear structure determined by the natural
parameters. □
Next, we deﬁne a somewhat diﬀerent type of category of localizations, namely,
a category of ﬁnite ´etale localizations [cf. the categories “Loc( −)”, “Lock(−)” of
[Mzk7], §2]
FELoc(X∗,φ∗)
associated to an RC-Teichm¨uller pair ( X∗,φ∗). The objects of this category are
RC-Teichm¨uller pairs (Y ∗,ψ ∗), where Y ∗ admits a ﬁnite ´etale morphism [of RC-
Riemann orbisurfaces] Y ∗ → X∗ such that ψ∗ is the pull-back to Y ∗ of φ∗.T h e
morphisms
(Y ∗
1 ,ψ ∗
1) → (Y ∗
2 ,ψ ∗
2)
are ﬁnite ´etale morphisms [of RC-Riemann orbisurfaces] Y ∗
1 → Y ∗
2 [which are not
necessarily over X∗!] with respect to which ψ∗
2 pulls back to ψ∗
1. Similarly, if X∗
is of complex type, then one may deﬁne a similar category
FELocC(X∗,φ∗)
by taking the objects to be the objects of FELoc( X∗,φ∗)a n dt h emorphisms to
be the “holomorphic” morphisms, i.e., the morphisms ( Y ∗
1 ,ψ ∗
1) → (Y ∗
2 ,ψ ∗
2)o f
FELoc(X∗,φ∗) that induce holomorphic maps from each connected component of
the complexiﬁcation of Y ∗
1 lying over some ﬁxed connected component X0 of the
complexiﬁcation of X∗ to some connected component of the complexiﬁcation of Y ∗
2
lying over X0.
Deﬁnition 2.5. We shall refer to the RC-Teichm¨uller pair (X∗,φ∗)a sa core
(respectively, C-core)i f X∗ is of real or complex type (respectively, of complex
type), and, moreover, the object of FELoc(X∗,φ∗) (respectively, FELocC(X∗,φ∗))
determined by ( X∗,φ∗) forms a terminal object of FELoc(X∗,φ∗) (respectively,
FELocC(X∗,φ∗)) [cf. [Mzk7], Deﬁnition 2.1, (ii); [Mzk7], Remark 2.1.1].
Corollary 2.6. (Extension of Equivalences of Categories) In the notation
of Theorem 2.3, suppose further that, fori =3 , 4, (X∗
i ,φ∗
i
) is an RC-Teichm¨uller
pair, and that, for i =1 , 2, 3, 4, the morphism π1(X∗
i ) → Πi is the identity
morphism on π1(X∗
i ). [Thus, it is immediate that Πi is both “totally ramiﬁed at

30 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
inﬁnity” and “stack-resolving”.] Moreover, for i =1 , 2, let us assume that we have
been given an equivalence of categories
Φ: Loc□
Π1 (X∗
1 ,φ∗
1
)
∼
→ Loc□
Π2 (X∗
2 ,φ∗
2
)
[where □ is “ P”, “R”, or “S”], as well as a ﬁnite ´etale morphism of RC-Riemann
orbisurfaces
(X∗
i ,φ∗
i
) → (X∗
i+2,φ∗
i+2)
with respect to which φ∗
i+2 pulls back to φ∗
i .T h e n :
(i) The morphism (X∗
i ,φ∗
i
) → (X∗
i+2,φ∗
i+2) induces a natural equivalence of
categories
Loc□(X∗
i ,φ∗
i
)
∼
→ Loc□(X∗
i+2,φ∗
i+2)(X∗
i ,φ∗
i
)
[where i =1 , 2; □ is “ P”, “ R”, or “ S”; we omit the subscripted “ Πi’s”]. In
particular, we obtain a natural functor
Loc□(X∗
i ,φ∗
i
) → Loc□(X∗
i+2,φ∗
i+2)
[i.e., by composing the natural functorLoc□(X∗
i+2,φ∗
i+2)(X∗
i ,φ∗
i
) → Loc□(X∗
i+2,φ∗
i+2)
with the above equivalence].
(ii) Suppose that □ is “R”o r“ S”, and that, fori =1 , 2, (X∗
i+2,φ∗
i+2) is either
a core or a C-core. Then there exists a 1-commutative diagram
Loc□(X∗
1 ,φ∗
1
) → Loc□(X∗
1+2,φ∗
1+2
)
⏐⏐↓Φ
⏐⏐↓Ψ
Loc□(X∗
2 ,φ∗
2
) → Loc□(X∗
2+2,φ∗
2+2
)
in which the vertical arrows are equivalences of categories; the horizontal ar-
rows are the natural functors of (i); Ψ is uniquely determined, up to unique
isomorphism, by the condition that the diagram 1-commute.
(iii) Suppose that “ □ = P”, and that, for i =1 , 2, there exists a cartesian
commutative diagram of ﬁnite ´etale morphisms of RC-orbifolds
Y ∗
i → Y ∗
i+2
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
X∗
i → X∗
i+2
in which the lower horizontal arrow arises from the morphism(X∗
i ,φ∗
i
) → (X∗
i+2,φ∗
i+2)
given above; Y ∗
i , Y ∗
i+2 are punctured RC-tori of complex type; Y ∗
i+2 is once-
punctured [which implies that Y ∗
i is of torsion type , and that (Y ∗
i ,φ∗
i
|Y ∗
i ),

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 31
(Y ∗
i+2,φ∗
i+2|Y ∗
i+2 ) are toral]; the vertical arrows are “minimal” [in the sense of
Remark 2.1.3]. Then there exists a 1-commutative diagram
LocP(X∗
1 ,φ∗
1
) → LocP(X∗
1+2,φ∗
1+2
)
⏐⏐
↓
Φ
⏐
⏐
↓
Ψ
LocP(X∗
2 ,φ∗
2
) → LocP(X∗
2+2,φ∗
2+2
)
in which the vertical arrows are equivalences of categories; the horizontal ar-
rows are the natural functors of (i); Ψ is uniquely determined, up to unique
isomorphism, by the condition that the diagram 1-commute.
Proof. Assertion (i) (respectively, (ii)) is immediate from the deﬁnitions (respec-
tively, the deﬁnitions and Theorem 2.3, (iii)). Next, we consider assertion (iii).
Now it follows from Remark 2.1.3; Corollary 2.4, (i), (ii), (iii); the minimality as-
sumption on Y ∗
i → X∗
i [where i =1 , 2], that Φ maps Y ∗
1 to an isomorph of Y ∗
2 .
Now assertion (iii) follows by observing that the automorphism group of Y ∗
i that
determines the quotient Y ∗
i → Y ∗
i+2 [hence also the quotient Y ∗
i → X∗
i+2,s i n c et h e
ﬁrst commutative diagram in the statement of Corollary 2.6, (iii), iscartesian]m a y
be recovered category-theoreticallywithin LocP(X∗
i ,φ∗
i
), by applying Theorem 2.3,
(ii) [i.e., the fact that Φ arises from a map that is compatible with theaﬃne linear
structures of the punctured RC-tori Y ∗
i ], together with the fact that Y ∗
1 , Y ∗
2 are of
torsion type. Finally, we note that the uniqueness assertions in assertions (ii), (iii)
follow from the deﬁnitions, together with Theorem 2.3, (i). □
Remark 2.6.1. The “extendability” property of Corollary 2.6, (ii), (iii), is in-
tended to be reminiscent of the “extendability” result proven in [Mzk7], Corollary
2.5, (ii) [cf. also [Mzk8], Corollary 3.1.4, (iii); [Mzk9], Theorem 2.3; [Mzk11], Theo-
rem 6.8, (ii)] by applying thep-adic version of the Grothendieck Conjecture,p r o v e n
in [Mzk4].

32 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Appendix: Quasiconformal Linear Algebra
In this Appendix, we review various well-known facts concerning the geom-
etry and linear algebra of the euclidean plane that are relevant to the theory of
quasiconformal maps.
Write
GL>0
2 (R),G L<0
2 (R) ⊆ GL2(R)
for the subsets of matrices of positive and negative determinant, respectively. In
the following discussion, we shall oftenidentify the real vector space underlying the
complex number ﬁeld C with R2 via the bijection R2 ∋ (a, b) ↦→ a + ib ∈ C.T h i s
identiﬁcation determines an immersion of topological groups
C× ↪→ GL>0
2 (R)
by mapping C× ∋ a + ib ↦→
( a −b
ba
)
. In the following discussion, we shall often
identify C× with its image under this immersion and write “C× ⊆ GL>0
2 (R)”. The
subgroup C× ⊆ GL>0
2 (R) is normalized by the matrix
τ
def
=
( 01
10
)
conjugation by which induces complex conjugation on C×.
If M ∈ GL2(R), then we shall write
fM : C → C
for the associated map from C to itself. Also, we shall often think of GL2(R)
as acting on the upper half-plane H in the standard fashion, via linear fractional
transformations, i.e., if z is the standard coordinate on H,t h e nM =
( ab
cd
)
∈
GL2(R) acts via the transformation
z ↦→ az + b
cz + d
if M ∈ GL>0
2 (R), and via the transformation
z ↦→ a
z + b
c
z + d
if M ∈ GL<0
2 (R) [cf. [Mzk5], Example 3.2].
Now we have the following:

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 33
Proposition A.1. (The Dilatation of a Quasiconformal Map)
(i) The map
t ↦→
( t 0
01
)
[where t ∈ R≥1
def
= {s ∈ R | s ≥ 1}] determines a structure of “one-dimensional
manifold with boundary” [i.e.,{1} is the boundary ofR≥1] on the double coset space
C×\GL>0
2 (R)/C× ∼= SO(2)\SL2(R)/SO(2)
—w h e r e“∼=” denotes the bijection induced by the natural inclusion SL2(R) ↪→
GL>0
2 (R).
(ii) The map
M ↦→ Dil(M)
def
=
⏐⏐⏐∂fM /∂
z
∂fM /∂z
⏐⏐⏐
determines an isomorphism of manifolds with boundary
C×\GL>0
2 (R)/C× ∼
→ [0, 1)
which is given, relative to the bijection with R≥1 appearing in (i), by the map
t ↦→ t − 1
t +1
[where t ∈ R≥1]. Alternatively, if we apply the bijection of H with the open unit
disk given by z ↦→ iz+1
iz−1 , then the subset [0, 1) of the open unit disk determines a
parametrization of C×\GL>0
2 (R)/C× relative to which the map M ↦→ Dil(M) is
given by the identity.
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). It is immediate from the deﬁnitions that the
natural inclusion SL2(R) ↪→ GL>0
2 (R) induces a homeomorphism of coset spaces
C×\GL>0
2 (R)/C× ∼= SO(2)\SL2(R)/SO(2). Moreover, if we apply the homeomor-
phism SL2(R)/SO(2)
∼
→ H given by lettingSL2(R) act on the pointi ∈ H, followed
by the homeomorphism discussed in assertion (ii) ofH with the open unit disk, then
the parametrization of assertion (i) is clearly mapped onto the inverval [0, 1), which
may be identiﬁed with the quotient of the unit disk by the action of the unit circle
S1 ⊆ C×. This completes the proof of assertion (i).
To verify assertion (ii), let us ﬁrst observe that we may writefM (z)= c1z+c2
z,
where c1 = a1+ib1, c2 = a2+ib2; a1,a2,b1,b2 ∈ R;D i l (M)= |c2|/|c1|. This descrip-
tion of fM , Dil(M) renders evident the fact thatM ↦→ Dil(M) depends only on the
image of M in C×\GL>0
2 (R)/C×. Now applying Dil( −) to the parametrization of
assertion (i) yields the functiont−1
t+1 [since 2(ta+ib)=( t+1)(a+ib)+(t− 1)(a− ib)].
This completes the proof of assertion (ii). □

34 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Proposition A.2. (Dictionary between Function Theory and Linear
Algebra) Let M ∈ GL2(R).T h e n :
(i) The subgroup C× ⊆ GL2(R) is equal to the set of matrices ∈ GL2(R) that
commute with the matrix determined by i ∈ C×.
(ii) M lies in C× (respectively, GL>0
2 (R); C× · τ; GL<0
2 (R))i fa n do n l yi f
the map fM is conformal (respectively,quasiconformal; anti-conformal; anti-
quasiconformal).
Remark A.2.1. Here, we use the term “anti-conformal” (respectively, “anti-
quasiconformal”) to refer to a map that is conformal (respectively, quasiconformal)
with respect to the holomorphic structure on the domain given by the holomor-
phic functions and the holomorphic structure on the codomain given by the anti-
holomorphic functions.
Proof. Assertion (i) (respectively, (ii)) is an easy exercise (respectively, follows
immediately from the deﬁnitions and assertion (i)). □
Deﬁnition A.3.
(i) We shall refer to any [necessarily nonempty] open subset of R
2 given by
the interior of the convex hull of the pointsw,w + u, w+ v,w + u + v ∈ R2,w h e r e
u, v ∈ R2 are a basis of R2 and w ∈ R2,a sa parallelogram [of R2]. If S ⊆ R2
is a subset, then we shall refer to a parallelogram P ⊆ S as pre-compact if it is
contained in a compact subset ofS [i.e., if the closure ofP in R2 is contained in S].
(ii) We shall refer to a parallelogram ofR2 as a rectangle if all of its angles are
right angles [i.e., in the notation of (i), the vectors u, v ∈ R2 are orthogonal]. We
shall refer to a rectangle of R2 as a square if all of its sides are of the same length
[relative to the standard euclidean metric on R2].
(iii) We shall refer to a map R2 → R2 as linear (respectively, ortho-linear;
quasiconformal linear; conformal linear; anti-quasiconformal linear; anti-conformal
linear) if it is equal to the map determined by anM ∈ GL2(R), whereM is arbitrary
(respectively, ∈ C× ⋃ C× · τ; ∈ GL>0
2 (R); ∈ C×; ∈ GL<0
2 (R); ∈ C× · τ).
(iv) We shall refer to a mapR2 → R2 as aﬃne linear (respectively,aﬃne ortho-
linear; aﬃne quasiconformal linear; aﬃne conformal linear; aﬃne anti-quasiconfor-
mal linear; aﬃne anti-conformal linear ) if it may be written as the composite
of a translation [i.e., the map R2 → R2 given by adding a ﬁxed u0 ∈ R2]w i t h
a linear (respectively, ortho-linear; quasiconformal linear; conformal linear; anti-
quasiconformal linear; anti-conformal linear) map.
One way to show that some given homeomorphism of, say,R2 to itself is aﬃne
linear [i.e., either aﬃne quasiconformal linear or aﬃne anti-quasiconformal linear]

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 35
or aﬃne ortho-linear [i.e., either aﬃne conformal linear or aﬃne anti-conformal
linear] is by applying the following result:
Proposition A.4. (Squares, Rectangles, and Parallelograms) Let B ⊆ R2
be a connected open subset;l e t
h : B → R2
be a map that determines a homeomorphism of B onto a parallelogram of R2.
Then:
(i) Suppose that h maps pre-compact parallelograms in B to parallelograms
in R2.T h e nh is [the restriction to B of a map R2 → R2 that is] aﬃne linear .
(ii) Suppose that h maps pre-compact rectangles in B to rectangles in R2.
Then h is [the restriction to B of a map R2 → R2 that is] aﬃne ortho-linear .
(iii) Suppose that h maps pre-compact squares in B to squares in R2.T h e n
h is [the restriction to B of a map R2 → R2 that is] aﬃne ortho-linear .
Proof. First, we observe that, by considering squares with edges parallel to the
coordinate axes contained inB and applying an appropriate aﬃne ortho-linear map
to B, we may assume without loss of generality thatB itself is a square with edges
parallel to the coordinate axes centered at the originthat contains the points (a, b),
where a, b ∈ R, |a| = |b| =1 .
Next, we consider assertion (i). Deﬁne an “edge-segment” of a pre-compact
parallelogram P ⊆ B to be an inﬁnite set of the formK ⋂K′,w h e r eK is the closure
of P; K′ is the closure of another pre-compact parallelogram P ′;a n dP ⋂P ′ = ∅.
Consider the equivalence relation on edge-segments of P generated by the pre-
equivalence relation that two edge-segments E1, E2 are “pre-equivalent” if the
intersection E1
⋂E2 is inﬁnite . Then observe that the edges of a pre-compact
parallelogram P ⊆ B are in natural bijective correspondence with the equivalence
classes of edge-segments of P, and that, under this bijective correspondence, an
edge of P is given by the union of edge-segments that belong to the corresponding
equivalence class of edge-segments. The vertices of P may then be recovered as
the nonempty intersections of pairs of edges. Thus, the “aﬃne linear structure”
of B may be recovered by considering the combinatorics of intersections among
the various edges of the pre-compact parallelograms of B [i.e., in the notation of
Deﬁnition A.3, (i), this combinatorial data encodes precisely the information that
“if one takes w as the origin, then the sum of the points w + u, w + v is equal to
w + u + v”]. Since this description of the aﬃne linear structure of B is preserved
by h, we thus conclude that h is aﬃne linear, as desired.
Next, we consider assertion (ii). By composing h with an appropriate aﬃne
ortho-linear map R2 → R2, we may assume, without loss of generality, that h
ﬁxes the points (0, 0) and (1, 1). Next, let us observe that the [“rectangle-theoretic
analogue” of the “parallelogram-theoretic”] topological description of vertices and

36 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
edges given in the preceding paragraph [i.e., where “ P”, “P ′” are assumed to be
rectangles] implies thath preserves line segments. Since, moreover, a square may be
characterized as a rectangleP such that the line segments given by thediagonals of
the rectangle are orthogonal [i.e., admit sub-line segments that appear as adjacent
edges of some rectangle], we conclude that h preserves squares. Thus, to complete
the proof of assertion (ii), it suﬃces to verify assertion (iii).
Finally, we consider assertion (iii). By composing h with an appropriate aﬃne
ortho-linear map R2 → R2, we may assume, without loss of generality, thath ﬁxes
the points (0 , 0) and (1 , 1). Since [as one veriﬁes immediately] there is precisely
one square S ⊆ R2 that has the points (0 , 0) as (1 , 1) as opposite vertices,o n e
concludes from the topological description of vertices and edges given above thath
preserves this square S. Thus, by possibly composing h with a reﬂection about the
diagonal of S [which is manifestly an aﬃne ortho-linear map], we may assume that
h induces the identity morphism on the set of edges ofS. Moreover, the topological
description of the vertices and edges applied above also implies that h maps line
segments in B that are parallel to one of the two coordinate axes of R2 [i.e., to
one of the edges of S] to line segments in R2 that are parallel to one of the two
coordinate axes of R2. On the other hand, this last property implies [in light of the
fact that h induces the identity morphism on the set of edges of S]t h a th may be
written in the form
h((a, b)) = (f(a),g (b))
[where f, g are real-valued continuous functions on some open intervalI ⊆ R such
that 0 ∈ I and I is preserved by multiplication by−1]. Since, moreover, h preserves
squares, it follows that f = g.
Next, let us observe that for a, b ∈ I such that a, b ̸=0 , ab ∈ I, the fact that h
preserves line segments [cf. the argument applied in the discussion of assertion (ii)]
implies that f(ab)/f(a)i s independent of a, hence [since f(1) = 1] that f(ab)=
f(a) · f(b). Since f(0) = 0, we thus conclude that for all a, b ∈ I such that ab ∈ I,
we have f(ab)= f(a) · f(b). Thus, since R× is a real analytic Lie group,w et h u s
conclude [by Cartan’s theorem— cf., e.g., [Serre], Chapter V, §9, Theorem 2] that
there exists a positive real α such that
f(x)= |x|α · (x/|x|)
for all nonzero x ∈ I. On the other hand, since, for suﬃciently small ϵ> 0, the
function
x ↦→ f(x + ϵ) − f(ϵ)
satisﬁes similar hypotheses to f, we conclude that this function may be written, at
least for, say, x ∈ J ⊆ I,w h e r eJ is some open inverval of positive real numbers,
in the form x ↦→ c · xα′
,f o rs o m ec, α′ > 0. That is to say, we obtain the relation
(x + ϵ)α − ϵα = c · xα′
[for x ∈ J]. Thus, by, say, diﬀerentiating this relation with respect tox, taking the
natural logarithm, and then diﬀerentiating again with respect tox, we obtain that
(α − 1)x =( α′ − 1)(x + ϵ)

CA TEGORIES OF HYPERBOLIC RIEMANN SURF ACES 37
[a contradiction, unless α = α′ =1 ] . T h u s ,α = α′ = 1, i.e., f(x)= x for all x ∈ I,
so h is aﬃne ortho-linear, as desired. □

38 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Bibliography
[Lehto] O. Lehto, Univalent Functions and Teichm¨uller Spaces, Graduate Texts in
Mathematics 109, Springer, 1987.
[Mzk1] S. Mochizuki, Foundations of p-adic Teichm¨uller Theory, AMS/IP Studies
in Advanced Mathematics 11, American Mathematical Society/International
Press (1999).
[Mzk2] S. Mochizuki, Categorical Representation of Locally Noetherian Log Schemes,
Adv. Math. 188 (2004), pp. 222-246.
[Mzk3] S. Mochizuki, A Version of the Grothendieck Conjecture forp-adic Local Fields,
The International Journal of Math. 8 (1997), pp. 499-506.
[Mzk4] S. Mochizuki, The Local Pro-p Anabelian Geometry of Curves, Invent. Math.
138 (1999), pp. 319-423.
[Mzk5] S. Mochizuki, Topics Surrounding the Anabelian Geometry of Hyperbolic Curves,
Galois Groups and Fundamental Groups, Mathematical Sciences Research In-
stitute Publications 41, Cambridge University Press (2003), pp. 119-165.
[Mzk6] S. Mochizuki, The Absolute Anabelian Geometry of Hyperbolic Curves,Galois
Theory and Modular Forms, Kluwer Academic Publishers (2003), pp. 77-122.
[Mzk7] S. Mochizuki, The Absolute Anabelian Geometry of Canonical Curves,Kazuya
Kato’s ﬁftieth birthday, Doc. Math. 2003, Extra Vol. , pp. 609-640.
[Mzk8] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of Anabelioids, Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci. 40
(2004), pp. 819-881.
[Mzk9] S. Mochizuki, Galois Sections in Absolute Anabelian Geometry,Nagoya Math.
J. 179 (2005), pp. 17-45.
[Mzk10] S. Mochizuki, Categories of log schemes with Archimedean Structures,J. Math.
Kyoto Univ. 44 (2004), pp. 891-909.
[Mzk11] S. Mochizuki, Semi-graphs of Anabelioids, RIMS Preprint1477 (October 2004),
to appear in Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci.
[Mzk12] S. Mochizuki, Absolute Anabelian Cuspidalizations of Proper Hyperbolic Curves,
RIMS Preprint 1490 (February 2005).
[Serre] J.-P. Serre, Lie Algebras and Lie Groups, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1500,
Springer Verlag (1992).
Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences
Kyoto University
Kyoto 606-8502, Japan
Fax: 075-753-7276
motizuki@kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp