Categorical Representation of
Locally Noetherian Log Schemes
Shinichi Mochizuki
June 2002
Contents:
§1. Locally Noetherian Schemes
§2. Log Structures
Introduction
Let Xlog be a ﬁne (cf. [Kato1], §2.3) saturated (cf. (the evident ´etale general-
ization of) [Kato2], §1.5) log scheme (cf. [Kato1], §1.2) whose underlying scheme
X is locally noetherian. Let us denote by
Sch(X)
the category whose objects are morphisms of ﬁnite type Y → X,w h e r eY is a
noetherian scheme, and whose morphisms (from an object Y1 → X to an object
Y2 → X)a r emorphisms of ﬁnite type Y1 → Y2 lying over X,a n db y
Schlog(Xlog)
the category whoseobjects are morphisms of ﬁne saturated log schemesY log → Xlog,
where Y is a noetherian scheme, and the underlying morphism of schemes Y → X
is of ﬁnite type , and whose morphisms (from an object Y log
1 → Xlog to an object
Y log
2 → Xlog)a r emorphisms of ﬁnite type Y log
1 → Y log
2 (i.e., morphisms for which
the underlying morphism of schemes Y1 → Y2 is of ﬁnite type) lying over Xlog.
Our main results (which correspond to Theorems 1.7, 2.19, in the text) are the
following:
Theorem A. (Categorical Reconstructibility of Locally Noetherian
Schemes) The locally noetherian schemeX may be reconstructed category-theoreti-
cally fromSch(X), in a fashion that isfunctorial with respect toX —c f .T h e o r e m
1.7 for more details.
Theorem B. (Categorical Reconstructibility of Locally Noetherian Log
Schemes) The locally noetherian ﬁne, saturated log scheme Xlog may be recon-
structed category-theoretically from Schlog(Xlog), in a fashion that is functorial
with respect to Xlog — cf. Theorem 2.19 for more details.
Typeset by AMS-TEX
1

2 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
These results are partially motivated by the anabelian philosophy of Grothen-
dieck — cf., e.g., [Mzk], [NTM], for more details. In essence, the diﬀerenceis that
in the anabelian case, instead of considering the category Sch(X) of (roughly speak-
ing) all schemes of ﬁnite type over X, one considers the category ´Et(X)o f ﬁnite
´etale coverings of X.
Another important motivating circle of ideas for the author was the work of
[Bell1–4], [Lwv1–2]. The main idea here is (roughly speaking) that instead of
working with set-theoretic objects—s u c ha sschemes or log schemes —o n es h o u l d
regard categories as the “fundamental, primitive objects” of mathematics discourse.
From this point of view, it is thus of interest to know — cf., e.g., [John], Theorem
7.24, for the case ofsober topological spaces— whether or not schemes/log schemes
may be “represented” by categories (such as Sch(X), Sch
log(Xlog)). Theorems A
and B provide onenatural (though most probably non-unique!) aﬃrmative answer
to this question.
Acknowledgements:
I would like to thank A. Tamagawa for the time that he so generously shared
with me in countless stimulating discussions.
Notations and Conventions:
We will denote by N the set of natural numbers, by which we mean the set of
integers n ≥ 0, and by Z the ring of rational integers.

CA TEGORICAL REPRESENT A TION OF LOG SCHEMES 3
Section 1: Locally Noetherian Schemes
Let X be a locally noetherian scheme. Let us denote by
Sch(X)
the category whose objects are morphisms of ﬁnite type Y → X,w h e r eY is a
noetherian scheme, and whose morphisms (from an object Y1 → X to an object
Y2 → X)a r e morphisms of ﬁnite type Y1 → Y2 lying over X. To simplify ter-
minology, we shall often refer to the domain Y of an arrow Y → X which is an
object of Sch(X) as an “object of Sch(X)”. The purpose of the following discussion
(cf. Theorem 1.7 below) is to show that the schemeX may be reconstructed purely
category-theoreticallyfrom the category Sch(X).
In the following discussion, we shall often speak of various properties of objects
and morphisms of Sch(X)a sb e i n g“category-theoretic”.By this, we mean that they
are preserved by arbitrary equivalences of categories
Sch(X)
∼
→ Sch(X′)
(where X′ is another locally noetherian scheme). To simplify notation, however, we
omit explicit mention of this equivalence, ofX′, and of the various “primed” objects
and morphisms corresponding to the original objects and morphisms in Sch(X).
Proposition 1.1. (Characterization of One-Pointed Schemes) Let us refer
to schemes whose underlying topological spaces consist of precisely one element as
one-pointed.
(i) If X is nonempty, then there exists animmersion Y↪ → X from a reduced
one-pointed Y into X.
(ii) The reduced one-pointed objectsY of Sch(X) (i.e., objects which are spectra
of ﬁelds) may be category-theoretically characterized as the “minimal objects”,
i.e., the nonempty objects for which any monomorphismZ ↣ Y in Sch(X) (where
Z is nonempty) is necessarily an isomorphism.
(iii) The one-pointed objects Y of Sch(X) may be category-theoretically char-
acterized as the objects for which there exists (up to isomorphism) precisely one
monomorphism Z ↣ Y in Sch(X) (namely, Y
red ↪→ Y ) from a reduced one-pointed
object Z to Y .
Proof. We begin with assertion (i). By replacing X by an open aﬃne in X,w e
may assume that X is the spectrum of a noetherian ring A. Then assertion (i)
follows from the fact that such a ring possesses at least one maximal ideal.

4 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Next, we turn to assertion (ii). Since an immersion is a monomorphism, the
suﬃciency portion of assertion (ii) follows formally from assertion (i). As for ne-
cessity, let Z ↣ Y be a monomorphism to a reduced one-pointed Y .T h u s , t h e
diagonal Z → Z ×Y Z is an isomorphism (since Z → Y is a monomorphism), so
Z → Y is unramiﬁed. Since it is also clearlyﬂat (since Y is the spectrum of a ﬁeld),
we thus conclude that Z → Y is an ´etale monomorphism. Since Z is nonempty, we
thus conclude that Z → Y is an isomorphism, as desired.
Finally, we verify assertion (iii). Necessity follows from the existence of the
monomorphism Yred ↣ Y ; the fact that every monomorphism Z ↣ Y (where Z
is a reduced one-pointed object) necessarily factors throughYred; and the necessity
portion of assertion (ii). To prove suﬃciency, observe that the condition stated in
assertion (iii) implies that every nonempty open subscheme of Y is equal to Y (cf.
assertion (i), applied to the open subscheme and its complement). In particular,
the underlying topological space of Y is connected and of dimension zero.S i n c eY
is a noetherian scheme, this implies that Y is one-pointed, as desired. ⃝
Corollary 1.2. (Characterization of Smooth Morphisms) The smooth
morphisms Y
1 → Y2 of Sch(X) may be characterized category-theoretically as those
morphisms which satisfy the following property: Let Z0 ↣ Z be a monomorphism
of one-pointed schemes. Then any commutative diagram
Z0 −→ Y1
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
Z −→ Y2
admits a morphism Z → Y1 such that both of the resulting triangular diagrams
commute.
Proof. One veriﬁes immediately that a monomorphism of one-pointed schemes
is necessarily a closed immersion. Thus, Corollary 1.2 is a formal consequence of
Proposition 1.1, (i), (iii), and a well-known characterization ofsmoothness (cf., e.g.,
[EGA IV], Corollary 12.1.7, Proposition 17.14.2). ⃝
Corollary 1.3. (Characterization of Open Immersions and Cover-
ings) The open immersions Y1 → Y2 of Sch(X) may be characterized category-
theoretically as the smooth monomorphisms. A collection Zα → Y (for α ranging
over the elements of some index set A) of open immersions of Sch(X) is a cover-
ing if and only if every monomorphism P ↣ Y ,w h e r eP is a reduced, one-pointed
scheme, admits a factorization through some Zα.
Proof. This is a formal consequence of Corollary 1.2; Proposition 1.1, (i) (applied
to the complement of the union of the images of the Zα), (ii); and [EGA IV],
Theorem 17.9.1. ⃝

CA TEGORICAL REPRESENT A TION OF LOG SCHEMES 5
Next, let us recall that a sober topological space is one for which every irre-
ducible closed subset has exactly one generic point (cf. [John], Deﬁnition 7.21, (ii)).
If T is a topological space, then we shall denote the category of sheaves on T by:
Shv(T)
Here, we implicitly wish to think of Shv(T)a sa “topos over some ﬁxed category of
sets Ens” (cf. [John], p. 113). In fact, since the natural geometric morphism of
topoi Shv(T) → Ens is unique up to canonical isomorphism (cf. [John], Proposi-
tion 4.41), we shall take the liberty of omitting explicit mention of the “structure
morphisms to Ens” in the following discussion.
If T
1, T2 are topoi, then let us denote by
Mor(T1, T2)
the category of geometric morphisms of topoiT1 →T 2 (cf. [John], Deﬁnition 1.16),
and by
Mor(T1, T2)
the set of isomorphism classes of geometric morphisms of topoi T1 →T 2 (i.e., the
set of isomorphism classes of objects of the category Mor(T1, T2)). Then sober
topological spaces admit the following interesting property (cf. [John], Theorem
7.24):
Theorem 1.4. (Categorical Reconstructibility of Sober Topological
Spaces) Let T1, T2 be sober topological spaces. Denote by Mor(T1,T 2) the set of
continuous maps T1 → T2. Then the natural morphism
Mor(T1,T 2) → Mor(Shv(T1),Shv(T2))
is a bijection.
Corollary 1.5. (Categorical Reconstructibility of Underlying Topolog-
ical Spaces) If Y is an object of Sch(X), then denote the underlying topological
space of Y by |Y |.T h e n|Y | may be categorically reconstructed (up to canonical
isomorphism) from the data (Sch(X),Y ) (i.e., of a category and an object in this
category).
Proof. Indeed, (since |Y | is sober — cf. [John], p. 230) this is a formal consequence
of Corollary 1.3, Theorem 1.4, since the category of sheaves Shv(|Y |) may be recon-
structed from Sch(X) as soon as one knows the subcategory of Sch( X) consisting
of open immersions into Y , together with the information of which collections of
open immersions are coverings. ⃝

6 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Ultimately, we would like to reconstruct not just the topological space |Y |
but the scheme structure of Y category-theoretically from the data (Sch( X),Y ).
Thus, to do this, it remains to reconstruct the structure sheaf OY of Y . Since this
structure sheaf is represented by thering scheme A1
Y (i.e., the aﬃne line, equipped
with its usual ring scheme structure) over Y , it thus suﬃces to show that we can
reconstruct this ring scheme category-theoretically.
Proposition 1.6. (Canonical Open Subschemes of the Projective Line)
Suppose (for simplicity) that Y is connected.
(i) The projective line P1
Y over Y , together with its labeled sections 0Y , 1Y ,
∞ Y over Y , may be characterized category-theoretically (up to unique isomor-
phism) from the data (Sch(X),Y ).
(ii) The scheme (Gm)Y over Y , together with its group scheme structure and
section 1Y over Y , may be characterized category-theoretically (up to an isomor-
phism, which is unique — up to the inversion morphism on this group scheme)
from the data (Sch(X),Y ).
(iii) The scheme A1
Y over Y , together with its ring scheme structure and sec-
tions 0Y , 1Y over Y , may be characterized category-theoretically (up to canonical
isomorphism) from the data (Sch(X),Y ).
Proof. Note that, in light of Corollary 1.5, thepropermorphisms of Sch(X)m a yb e
characterized category-theoretically as those which are universally closed and give
rise to closed diagonal morphisms.T h e nP1
Y may be characterized as the unique (up
to possibly noncanonical isomorphism) smooth (cf. Corollary 1.2), proper Z → Y
whose ﬁbers over reduced one-pointed objects of Sch(X) have underlying topological
spaces (cf. Corollary 1.5) which are connected and one-dimensional, and which,
moreover, admit a section σ : Y → Z with the property that the cardinality of the
Y ′-linear automorphisms of the data (Z → Y,σ) after base-change to some Y ′ → Y
cannot be bounded (by a ﬁnite cardinal) independently of Y ′.T h u s ,assertion (i)
follows from the fact that automorphisms of P1
Y that ﬁx three non-intersection
sections are necessarily equal to the identity.
Assertion (ii) follows formally from assertion (i) by thinking of (Gm)Y as rep-
resenting the functorthat assigns toY ′ → Y the set ofautomorphisms of P1
Y ′ which
ﬁx 0 Y , ∞ Y .
Finally, assertion (iii) follows formally from assertions (i), (ii) by observing
that the addition operation on A1
Y may be characterized as the unique morphism
A1
Y ×Y A1
Y
→ A1
Y
which has the expected restrictions to 0 Y ,1 Y and is compatible with the action
of (Gm)Y on all three copies of A1
Y . (Note that this compatibility is simply the
“distribuitivity” property of the addition and multiplication operations of the ring
structure.) ⃝

CA TEGORICAL REPRESENT A TION OF LOG SCHEMES 7
If C1, C2 are categories, then let us denote by
Isom(C1, C2)
the category of equivalences C1
∼
→C 2,a n db y
Isom(C1, C2)
the set of isomorphism classes of equivalencesC1
∼
→C 2 (i.e., the set of isomorphism
classes of objects of the category Isom(C1, C2)).
We are now ready to state the main result of the present §:
Theorem 1.7. (Categorical Reconstructibility of Locally Noetherian
Schemes) Let X, X′ be locally noetherian schemes.
(i) Let f : X → X′ be a quasi-compact morphism of schemes. Then the
functor
Sch(f):S c h (X′) → Sch(X)
induced by base-change by f has no nontrivial automorphisms.
(ii) Denote the set of isomorphisms of schemesX
∼
→ X′ by Isom(X,X ′).T h e n
the natural map
Isom(X,X ′) → Isom(Sch(X′),Sch(X))
given by f ↦→ Sch(f) is bijective.
Proof. Observe that, in assertion (i), it is necessary to assume that f be quasi-
compact in order to ensure that base-change by f preserves the property of being
noetherian. To complete the proof of assertion (i), it suﬃces to show that there
do not exist any nontrivial collections of automorphisms αY : Y
∼
→ Y which are
functorial in Y ,a s Y varies among the objects in the essential image Im(Sch( f))
of Sch(f). (Here, the functoriality is also with respect to morphisms in the image
of Sch(f).) Let Y↪ → X be an open immersion in this essential image Im(Sch(f)),
arising, say, from an open immersion Y ′ ↪→ X′ of Sch(X′). Since Y↪ → X is a
monomorphism, it follows that αY is the identity. Write PY
def
= P1
Y .L e t CY be
the stable curve (cf., e.g., [DM]) over Y obtained by gluing together two copies
of PY along the copies of 0 Y ,1 Y , ∞ Y . Then since any automorphism of CY
necessarily preserves the (scheme-theoretic) nodes — thought of, for instance, as
the support locus of the coherent sheaf Ext1(ΩCY /Y , OCY ) (which is functorial in
automorphisms of CY ) — we conclude that αPY ﬁxes (scheme-theoretically) the
sections 0Y ,1 Y , ∞ Y ,u pt oa permutation ∈ S3 (the symmetric group on three
letters). But by thefunctoriality of Z ↦→ αZ, we thus conclude that this permutation
lies in the center of S3 (which is trivial), hence thatαPY is the identity.F r o mt h i s ,
we conclude (by considering the evident open immersion) that αA1
Y
is the identity,

8 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
hence (by considering ﬁbered products over Y )t h a tαAn
Y is the identity, for all
n ≥ 1. But this implies that αZ is the identity for any Z = φ(Z′), where Z′ → Y ′
is aﬃne. Thus, by the functoriality ofZ ↦→ αZ, we conclude thatαZ is the identity,
for all objects Z of Im(Sch(f)), as desired.
Next, we turn to assertion (ii). Suppose that we are given an equivalence:
φ :S c h (X′)
∼
→ Sch(X)
Let Y ′ be an object of Sch( X′), write Y
def
= φ(Y ′). Then by Corollary 1.5 above,
we obtain a natural homeomorphism
|Y |
∼
→| Y ′|
induced by φ, together with, by Proposition 1.6, (iii), a compatible isomorphism
OY ′
∼
→O Y of structure sheaves. That is to say, we obtain an isomorphism of
schemes
φY : Y
∼
→ Y ′
which is functorial in Y ′.
Now, let us observe that the objects of Sch( X) which are open immersions
U↪ → X into X may be characterized category-theoretically as follows: First of all,
the objects of Sch(X) given by monomorphisms Y ↣ X may be characterized by
the property that any arrow Z → Y in Sch(X) is the unique arrow from Z to Y .
Among such objects Y → X of Sch(X), the open immersions are those for which,
for every Z0 ↪→ Z as in Corollary 1.2, any Z0-point of Y lifts to a (unique) Z-point
of Y . Thus, by taking Y ′ equal to various open subschemes U′ ⊆ X′, we obtain
(by gluing) an isomorphism
φX : X
∼
→ X′
which satisﬁes (by the functoriality of φY ): Sch( φX)= φ (where the “=” makes
sense, in light of assertion (i)). Finally, when φ =S c h (f)f o rs o m ef : X
∼
→ X′,i t
is clear that φX = f. This completes the proof. ⃝
Finally, before proceeding, we note the following partial strengthening of The-
orem 1.7, (i):

CA TEGORICAL REPRESENT A TION OF LOG SCHEMES 9
Theorem 1.8. (Further Rigidity Property) Let X be a locally noetherian
scheme. Suppose that for every object Y → X of Sch(X), one is given an auto-
morphism αY : Y
∼
→ Y — not necessarily over X! — with the property that for
every morphism Y1 → Y2 of Sch(X), one has a commutative diagram:
Y1
αY1
−→ Y1
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
Y
2
αY2
−→ Y2
Then all of the αY are equal to the identity.
Proof. By considering morphisms as in Proposition 1.1, (i), one sees that every
αY induces the identity on the underlying topological space|Y | of Y . Next, observe
that the stable curve CY of the proof of Theorem 1.7, (i), is, in fact, deﬁned over
Z. Thus, there is a natural isomorphism βCY : CY
∼
→ CY lying over αY (i.e., the
product over Z of αY with the identity on the evident natural model for CY over
Z). As in the proof of Theorem 1.7, (i), αCY induces the automorphism αPY of
PY ,s o αPY preserves the sections 0Y ,1 Y , ∞ Y (up to a permutation). Moreover,
just as in the proof of Theorem 1.7, (i), this permutation isnecessarily the identity.
Thus, we conclude that αPY is equal to the isomorphism βPY induced on PY by
βCY , hence that αA1
Y
is equal to the isomorphismβA1
Y
induced on A1
Y by βPY .B u t ,
by considering sections of A1
Y → Y (i.e., morphisms Y → A1
Z), this implies that αY
induces the identity not only on|Y |, but also onsections of the structure sheafOY ,
i.e., that αY is the identity, as desired. ⃝

10 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Section 2: Log Structures
In this §, we discuss the logarithmic analogue of the theory of §1. Let Xlog
be a ﬁne (cf. [Kato1], §2.3) saturated (cf. (the evident ´ etale generalization of)
[Kato2], §1.5) log scheme (cf. [Kato1], §1.2) whose underlying scheme X is locally
noetherian. Let us denote by
Schlog(Xlog)
the category whoseobjects are morphisms of ﬁne saturated log schemesY log → Xlog,
where Y is a noetherian scheme, and the underlying morphism of schemes Y → X
is of ﬁnite type , and whose morphisms (from an object Y log
1 → Xlog to an object
Y log
2 → Xlog)a r emorphisms of ﬁnite type Y log
1 → Y log
2 lying overXlog. To simplify
terminology, we shall often refer to thedomain Y log of an arrowY log → Xlog which
is an object of Schlog(Xlog) as an “object of Schlog(Xlog)”. Note that by associating
to an object Y → X of Sch(X) the object Y log → Xlog of Schlog(Xlog) obtained by
equipping Y with the log structure obtained by pulling back the log structure on
Xlog via Y → X, we obtain an embedding
Sch(X) ↪→ Schlog(Xlog)
— which thus allows us to regard Sch( X)a sa subcategory of Schlog(Xlog).
Let Y log be a log scheme. Then we shall denote its underlying scheme (re-
spectively, the morphism of monoids deﬁning its log structure)b y Y (respectively,
expY : MY →O Y ). Thus, we have an exact sequence of ´etale monoids on Y
0 →O ×
Y → MY → PY → 0
—w h e r et h e“characteristic” PY is deﬁned so as to make the sequence exact. If
Y log is ﬁne (hence integral), then we have injections
PY ↪→ P gp
Y ; MY ↪→ Mgp
Y
(where the superscript “gp” denotes the group associated to the monoid in ques-
tion).
If Y is reduced(respectively, one-pointed — cf. Proposition 1.1), then we shall
say that Y log is reduced (respectively, one-pointed). Suppose that Y log is reduced
and one-pointed, i.e., Y is equal to the spectrum of a ﬁeld k. Then one may think
of PY as the data of a (discrete) monoid equipped with a continuous action of the
absolute Galois group Gk of k. When this action is trivial, we shall say that the
log structure on Y log is split. In this case, we shall denote (by abuse of notation)
Γ(Y,P Y )b y PY .

CA TEGORICAL REPRESENT A TION OF LOG SCHEMES 11
Proposition 2.1. (Local Structure of Monoids) Let Y log be a reduced,
one-pointed ﬁne saturated log scheme with split log structure. ThenPY is a ﬁnitely
generated, torsion-free, integral saturated monoid, with no nonzero invertible ele-
ments. In particular, P gp
Y is a ﬁnitely generated torsion-free abelian group.
Proof. Indeed, since torsion elements of PY are necessarily invertible,a n dt h e
properties “ﬁnitely generated”, “integral”, and “saturated” follow from the deﬁni-
tions, it suﬃces to verify that PY has no nonzero invertible elements. Suppose that
fP ∈ PY is invertible. Then since O×
Y is a group, any lifting (which exists ´etale
locally on Y ) fM of fP to MY is invertible. On the other hand, by the deﬁnition
of a log structure (cf. [Kato1], §1.2), the invertibility of exp Y (fM ) implies that
fM ∈O ×
Y ,s o fP = 0, as desired. ⃝
Lemma 2.2. (Pointwise Nature of Log Structures) Let Zlog → Y log be a
morphism of ﬁne log schemes. Let Σ ⊆| Z| be a subset of the underlying topological
space |Z| of Z such that every open subset of |Z| containing Σ is equal to |Z| itself.
Suppose further thatZ
∼
→ Y , and that for every geometric pointζof Z whose image
in Z lies in Σ, we have PY,ζ
∼
→ PZ,ζ.T h e nZlog → Y log is an isomorphism.
Proof. Indeed, since we havePY,ζ = MY,ζ/O×
Y,ζ, PZ,ζ = MZ,ζ/O×
Z,ζ, it follows that
PY,ζ
∼
→ PZ,ζ implies that MY,ζ
∼
→ MZ,ζ. Thus, our hypothesis on Σ, together with
the coherenceof the log structures involved implies thatMY
∼
→ MZ , as desired. ⃝
Proposition 2.3. (Monomorphisms of Fine Saturated Log Schemes) A
morphism Zlog → Y log in Schlog(Xlog) is a monomorphism (in Schlog(Xlog))i f
and only if Z → Y is a monomorphism in the category of schemes, and, moreover,
for every geometric point ζ of Z, the induced morphism P gp
Y,ζ → P gp
Z,ζ is surjective.
Proof. Suﬃciency is a formal consequence of the deﬁnitions (and the fact that for
any ﬁne log scheme Slog, MS → Mgp
S is injective). Moreover, the necessity of the
condition that Z → Y be a monomorphism (in Sch(X), which is easily veriﬁed to be
the same as a monomorphism in the category of all schemes) is a formal consequence
of the deﬁnitions. Thus, to complete the proof of necessity, it suﬃces — by applying
an appropriate base-change — to consider the case where Z = Y = Spec(k)( w h e r e
k is a ﬁeld) and the log structures on Z
log, Y log are split.I f P gp
Y → P gp
Z fails to be
surjective, then there exists an artinian k-algebra A (of ﬁnite type), together with
a nontrivial character χ : P gp
Z /P gp
Y → μN (A)
def
= {a ∈ A× | aN =1 } (for some
integer N ≥ 1). If we equip W
def
= Spec(A) with the log structure pulled back from
Zlog, then we obtain a morphism W log → Zlog in Schlog(Xlog). In particular, since
PZ
∼
→ PW ,w em a yt h i n ko fχ as a character onMgp
W which vanishes onMgp
Y .T h u s ,
the automorphism α : W log → W log which is the identity on W and which maps
a section f ∈ MW to f · χ(f) has a nontrivial composite with W log → Zlog, but a
trivial composite with W log → Zlog → Y log. This shows that Zlog → Y log is not a
monomorphism, thus completing the proof of necessity. ⃝

12 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Proposition 2.4. (Minimal Objects) An object Y log of Schlog(Xlog) will be
called minimal if it is nonempty and satisﬁes the property that any monomorphism
Zlog ↣ Y log (where Zlog is nonempty) in Schlog(Xlog) is necessarily an isomor-
phism.
(i) A minimal object Y log is necessarily reduced and one-pointed.
(ii) If Y log is reduced and one-pointed, and its log structure is trivial,t h e n
Y log is minimal.
(iii) If Y log is reduced and one-pointed, and its log structure is given by the
chart N ∋ 1 ↦→ 0,t h e nY log is minimal.
Proof. Assertions (i) and (ii) are a formal consequence of the deﬁnitions; Propo-
sition 1.1, (ii); and Proposition 2.3. Assertion (iii) is a formal consequence of the
deﬁnitions; Proposition 1.1, (ii); Proposition 2.3; and the following elementary ob-
servation: Any quotient of integral monoids N ↠ Q for which Q has no nonzero
invertible elements (cf. Proposition 2.1), and N ∋ 1d o e sn o tm a pt o0∈ Q,i sa n
isomorphism. ⃝
Before proceeding, we review the following well-known
Lemma 2.5. (Monoids and Cones) Let V
Z be a ﬁnitely generated free Z-
module. Write VR
def
= VZ ⊗ Z R; V ∨
Z
def
= HomZ(VZ, Z); V ∨
R
def
= V ∨
Z ⊗ Z R.I f σ ⊆ V ∨
R is
a strongly convex rational polyhedral cone (cf., e.g., [Oda], p. 5), then let
us write σ∨ def
= {v ∈ VR |⟨ v,w ⟩≥ 0, ∀ w ∈ σ}.T h e n :
(i) The correspondence σ ↦→ P
def
= σ∨ ⋂ VZ deﬁnes a bijection between the set
of strongly convex rational polyhedral conesσ in V ∨
R and the set of ﬁnitely generated
saturated monoids P ⊆ VZ which generate VZ as a group.
(ii) Let P ⊆ VZ be a ﬁnitely generated monoid which generates VZ as a group.
Then its saturation P sat def
= {v ∈ VZ = P gp |∃ n ∈ Z>0 such that n · v ∈ P } is also
ﬁnitely generated.
(iii) Let P ⊆ VZ be a ﬁnitely generated saturated monoid which generates VZ
as a group and satisﬁes P ⋂ (−P)=0 ;l e ta,b ∈ P be distinct elements. Then
there exists a morphism of monoids
φ : P → N
such that φ(a) ̸= φ(b),a n dφ(c) ̸=0 , for all nonzero c ∈ P.
(iv) Let P1 ⊆ P2 (⊆ VZ) be ﬁnitely generated saturated monoids which generate
VZ as a group and satisfy P1 ̸= P2, P1
⋂ (−P1)=0 . Then there exists a morphism
of monoids
φ : P1 → N

CA TEGORICAL REPRESENT A TION OF LOG SCHEMES 13
such that φ(c) ̸=0 , for all nonzeroc ∈ P1, and the induced mapφgp : P gp
1 = VZ → Z
satisﬁes φgp(P2) ̸⊆ N.
Proof. Indeed, assertion (i) is stated in [Oda], p. 9. Assertion (ii) follows, for
instance, from the fact that the normalization of C[P]i s ﬁnite (by elementary
commutative algebra) over C[P] and also clearly of the formC[Q] for some monoid
Q ∈ VZ. Since by a well-known argument (cf. [Oda], p. 14), we have Q = P sat,
this ﬁniteness implies the ﬁnite generation of P sat.
Next, we turn to assertion (iii). The condition P ⋂ (−P) = 0 implies that
the cone σ corresponding to P (cf. (i)) generates V ∨
R . In particular, there exists an
element λ ∈ σ such that λ(b − a) ̸=0 . M o r e o v e r ,λ can be chosen to be lie in the
interior of σ — which means that σ contains an open ball in V ∨
R containing λ —
and (since V ∨
Q is dense in V ∨
R )t ob e integral (i.e., λ ∈ V ∨
Z ). These conditions imply
that the map λ : VZ → Z determined by λ maps nonzero elements of P to nonzero
elements of N (and a, b to distinct elements), hence deﬁnes a map φ : P → N with
the desired properties.
Finally, we condition assertion (iv).L e t σ2 ⊆ σ1 be the cones corresponding
to P1, P2, respectively. Since σ1 ̸⊆ σ2,a n db o t hσ1, σ2 are closed subsets of V ∨
R ,
we conclude that the interior of σ1 is not contained in σ2, hence that there exists
an element λ in the interior of σ1 such that λ/∈ σ2. Moreover, (since V ∨
Q is dense
in V ∨
R ) λ may be chosen to belong to V ∨
Z .S i n c eP1
⋂ (−P1) = 0, it follows that
the interior of σ1 is open in V ∨
R ,s ot h em a pλ : VZ → Z maps nonzero elements of
P1 to nonzero elements of N.S i n c eλ/∈ σ2, it follows that there exist elements of
P2 on which λ takes negative values.T h u s ,λ deﬁnes a map φ : P1 → N with the
desired properties. ⃝
Lemma 2.6. (Fibered Products of Fine Saturated Log Schemes) Let
Y log
1 → Zlog, Y log
2 → Zlog be morphisms in Schlog(Xlog). Write
W log
Schlog
def
= Y log
1 ×Schlog
Zlog Y log
2 ; W log
fs
def
= Y log
1 ×fs
Zlog Y log
2
W log
ﬁne
def
= Y log
1 ×ﬁne
Zlog Y log
2 ; W log
log
def
= Y log
1 ×log
Zlog Y log
2
for the ﬁbered products in the category Schlog(Xlog); the category of all ﬁne, sat-
urated log schemes; the category of all ﬁne log schemes; the category of all log
schemes, respectively. Then:
(i) We have natural morphisms
W
log
Schlog → W log
fs → W log
ﬁne → W log
log
of which the ﬁrst is an isomorphism. Moreover, Wlog may be identiﬁed with the
ﬁbered product Y1 ×Z Y2 in the category of schemes.
(ii) The underlying morphism of schemes Wﬁne → Wlog of the third mor-
phism of (i) is aclosed immersion which induces anisomorphism (Wﬁne )red →
(Wlog)red. The underlying morphism of monoids PWlog → PWfine is surjective.

14 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(iii) The underlying morphism of schemesWfs → Wﬁne of the second morphism
of (i) is ﬁnite and surjective. The underlying morphism of monoids PWfine →
PWfs is injective and induces an isomorphism P sat
Wfine
∼
→ PWfs .
Proof. Assertion (i) (except for the isomorphism assertion) is a formal conse-
quence of the deﬁnitions and [Kato1], §1.6. Assertion (ii) is a formal consequence
of the deﬁnitions and [Kato1], §2.6, 2.8 (cf. also the proof of [Kato1], Proposition
2.7). Assertion (iii) (together with the isomorphism assertion of (i)) follows by
applying the same argument as that of the proof of [Kato1], Proposition 2.7, to
the “saturation”of a chart, i.e., if P → MWfine is a local chart for W log
ﬁne ,t h e nW log
fs
is obtained (´etale locally) from W log
ﬁne by base-changing by Z[P] → Z[P sat], where
Spec(Z[P]) (respectively, Spec( Z[P sat])) is regarded as being equipped with the
log structure associated to the evident pre-log structure P → Z[P] (respectively,
P sat → Z[P sat]). ⃝
Proposition 2.7. (Minimal Hulls) Let Y log be a one-pointed object of the
category Schlog(Xlog). Then a monomorphism Hlog ↣ Y log will be called a hull
for Y log if every morphism Slog → Y log from a minimal object Slog to Y log factors
(necessarily uniquely!) though Hlog.Ah u l l Hlog ↣ Y log will be called a minimal
hull if every monomorphism Hlog
1 ↣ Hlog for which the composite Hlog
1 ↣ Y log
is a hull is necessarily an isomorphism. A one-pointed object Hlog will be called a
minimal hull if the identity morphism Hlog → Hlog is a minimal hull for Hlog.
(i) There exists a morphism Slog → Y log, for some minimal object Slog.
(ii) If Hlog
1 ↣ Y log, Hlog
2 ↣ Y log are hulls, then the product Hlog
1 ×Y log Hlog
2
(in Schlog(Xlog)) is also a hull. In particular, any two minimal hulls are isomorphic
(via a unique isomorphism over Y log).
(iii) Y log
red ↣ Y log is a minimal hull.
Proof. First, observe that assertion (ii) is a formal consequence of the deﬁnitions.
Next, recall that by Proposition 2.4, (i), every minimal object is reduced and
one-pointed. Thus, every morphism Slog → Y log (where Slog is minimal) factors
(uniquely) though Y log
red .I n p a r t i c u l a r ,Y log
red ↣ Y log is a hull for Y log.T h u s , f o r
the remainder of the proof, we may assume (without loss of generality) thatY log is
reduced. By Proposition 2.4, (ii), we may also assume (without loss of generality)
that the log structure on Y log is nontrivial.
Next, let us observe that ifY ′ → Y is ﬁnite ´etale, then the resultHlog ×Y Y ′ ↣
Y log ×Y Y ′ of base-changing ahull Hlog ↣ Y log is again a hull. Indeed, this follows
immediately from the deﬁnitions. In particular, to show that any (reduced) Y log is
a minimal hull, we may assume (without loss of generality) that the log structure
on Y log is split.
Now let Hlog ↣ Y log be a hull.T h e nIclaim that the morphism P gp
Y → P gp
H is
bijective. Indeed, surjectivity follows from Proposition 2.3, while injectivity follows

CA TEGORICAL REPRESENT A TION OF LOG SCHEMES 15
from the following observation: By Lemma 2.5, (iii) (cf. also Proposition 2.1), for
any two distinct elements a,b ∈ PY , there exists a morphism of monoids
PY → N
that maps a, b to distinct elements of N and nonzero elements of PY to nonzero
elements ofN. In particular, this morphism of monoids determines a morphism from
a minimal object of the type described in Proposition 2.4, (iii), to Y log.T h u s ,t h e
desired injectivity follows from the existence of such a morphism (and the deﬁnition
of a hull). Note that the existence of such a morphism also completes the proof of
assertion (i).
Thus, to complete the proof ofassertion (iii), it suﬃces to show that the injec-
tion P
Y ↪→ PH is surjective. But this follows by constructing a suitable morphism
from a minimal object of the type described in Proposition 2.4, (iii), to Y log (cf.
the preceding paragraph), by applying Lemma 2.5, (iv). ⃝
Corollary 2.8. (Classiﬁcation of Split Minimal Objects) Every minimal
object with split log structure is one of the two types described in Proposition 2.4,
(ii), (iii).
Proof. Indeed, this follows by constructing a suitable morphism from a minimal
object of the type described in Proposition 2.4, (iii), to Y
log (cf. the proof of
Proposition 2.7), by applying Lemma 2.5, (iii). ⃝
Corollary 2.9. (Characterization of One-Pointed Objects) The one-
pointed objects Y log of Schlog(Xlog) may be characterized category-theoretically as
the nonempty objects which satisfy the following property: For any two morphisms
Slog
i → Y log (for i =1 ,2), where Slog
i is a minimal object, the product Slog
1 ×Y log
Slog
2 (in Schlog(Xlog))i s nonempty.
Proof. If an object Y log of Schlog(Xlog)i s not one-pointed, then by Proposition
1.1, (iii), there exist non-isomorphic monomorphisms T1,T 2 ↣ Y (in Sch(X)), for
some reduced one-pointed T1, T2.T h u s ,T1, T2 necessarily have non-intersecting
images in Y . If we equip T1, T2 with the log structures pulled back from Y ,t h e n
we obtain morphisms T log
1 ,T log
2 → Y log in Schlog(Xlog) such that T log
1 ×Y log T log
2
is empty (cf. Proposition 2.6, (i), (ii), (iii)). Thus, if we choose (for i =1 ,2) a
morphism Slog
i → T log
i ,w h e r eSlog
i is minimal — cf. Proposition 2.7, (i) — we
obtain a contradiction to the condition of Corollary 2.9.
Conversely, if an object Y log of Schlog(Xlog) is one-pointed, and Slog
i → Y log
(for i =1 ,2) are as in the statement of Corollary 2.9, then by Proposition 2.6, (i),
(ii), (iii), Slog
1 ×Y log Slog
2 is nonempty, as desired. ⃝

16 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Corollary 2.10. (Characterization of Reduced One-Pointed Objects)
The reduced one-pointed objectsY log of Schlog(Xlog) may be characterized category-
theoretically as the one-pointed objects which are minimal hulls (cf. Proposition
2.7).
Proof. Indeed, this is a formal consequence of Proposition 2.7, (iii), and Corollary
2.9. ⃝
Deﬁnition 2.11.
(i) A morphism Y log
1 → Y log
2 of objects of Schlog(Xlog) will be called log-like if
the underlying morphism of schemes Y1 → Y2 is an isomorphism.
(ii) A morphism Y log
1 → Y log
2 of objects of Schlog(Xlog) will be called scheme-
like if the log structure on Y log
1 is the pull-back of the log structure onY log
2 via the
underlying morphism of schemes Y1 → Y2.
Corollary 2.12. (Characterization of Log-like and Scheme-like Mor-
phisms of Reduced One-Pointed Objects) Let Y log
1 → Y log
2 be a morphism of
reduced one-pointed objects ofSchlog(Xlog). Then we have the following category-
theoretic criteria for this morphism to be log-like/scheme-like:
(i) Y log
1 → Y log
2 is log-like if and only if it factors as the composite of
a monomorphism Y log
1 ↣ Y log
3 ,w h e r eY log
3 is a reduced one-pointed object of
Schlog(Xlog), with a morphism Y log
3 → Y log
2 which admits a section Y log
2 → Y log
3
(i.e., such that Y log
2 → Y log
3 → Y log
2 is the identity).
(ii) Y log
1 → Y log
2 is scheme-like if and only if thecategory of factorizations
Y log
1 → Y log
3 → Y log
2 ,w h e r eY log
3 is a reduced one-pointed object of Schlog(Xlog),
and Y log
1 → Y log
3 is log-like — i.e., whose objects are such factorizations and whose
morphisms are commutative diagrams
Y log
1 −→ Y log
3 −→ Y log
2
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
Y log
1 −→ Y log
4 −→ Y log
2
of morphisms in Sch(Xlog),o fw h i c hY log
1 → Y log
1 and Y log
2 → Y log
2 are the identity
morphisms — admits the factorization Y log
1 = Y log
1 → Y log
2 as a terminal object.
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i).T h e suﬃciency of the given condition
follows from Proposition 2.3 (and the fact that the sectionY log
2 → Y log
3 is necessarily
a monomorphism). To prove necessity, we construct Y log
3 as follows. First, let
Y ′ → Y
def
= Y1 ∼= Y2 be a ﬁnite ´etale Galois covering (withY ′ connected) so that the

CA TEGORICAL REPRESENT A TION OF LOG SCHEMES 17
pull-backs of the log structures onY log
1 , Y log
2 to Y ′ are split.W r i t eG
def
= Gal(Y ′/Y ).
Suppose that PY1 ×Y Y ′ is generated by r elements. Write
PG
for the monoid given by taking the direct product of [ Y ′ : Y ] copies of N,o n e
indexed by each element of G.T h u s ,G acts naturally on PG. If we equip the
scheme Y ′ with the log structure deﬁned by the pre-log structure which sends
nonzero elements of Pr
G (the direct product of r copies of PG)t o0 ∈O Y ′ and then
descend (by using the G-action on Pr
G)t o Y ,w eo b t a i nalog scheme Y log
4 such that
PY4 ×Y Y ′ = Pr
G.
Next, observe that (by the deﬁnition of r) there exists a G-equivariant surjec-
tion of monoids:
Pr
G ↠ PY1 ×Y Y ′
Thus, by descent, this surjection determines a monomorphism Y log
1 ↣ Y log
4 .
Now set Y log
3
def
= Y log
4 ×Y Y log
2 . Note that this product yields the same log
scheme, whether taken in Schlog(Xlog) or in the category of all log schemes. More-
over, the morphisms Y log
1 → Y log
2 , Y log
1 ↣ Y log
4 determine a monomorphism
Y log
1 ↣ Y log
3
whose composite with the projection Y log
3 → Y log
2 is the original morphism Y log
1 →
Y log
2 . Thus, to complete the proof of assertion (i), it suﬃces to prove the existence of
a section of the projection Y log
3 → Y log
2 . But the existence of such a section follows
from the (readily veriﬁed) existence of a G-equivariant morphism of monoids:
Pr
G → PY2 ×Y Y ′
(which is not necessarily surjective).
Finally, we verify assertion (ii). Consider the factorization Y log
1 → Y log
4 →
Y log
2 ,w h e r eY4
def
= Y1, and its log structure is the log structure pulled back from
Y log
2 . One checks easily thatthis factorization is a terminal object in the category of
factorizations and thatY log
4 → Y log
2 is (by construction)scheme-like.I f Y log
1 → Y log
2
is scheme-like, then it follows from the deﬁnitions that the factorization Y log
1 →
Y log
4 → Y log
2 is isomorphic to the factorization Y log
1 = Y log
1 → Y log
2 .T h i s p r o v e s
necessity. On the other hand, if the factorization Y log
1 = Y log
1 → Y log
2 is a terminal
object, then since a terminal object isunique (up to isomorphism), we thus conclude
that Y log
1 = Y log
1 → Y log
2 is isomorphic to Y log
1 → Y log
4 → Y log
2 ,s o Y log
1 → Y log
2 is
scheme-like.T h i sp r o v e ssuﬃciency. ⃝

18 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Corollary 2.13. (Characterization of Restriction of the Log Structure
to a Point) Let Slog ↣ Y log be a monomorphism of objects of Schlog(Xlog).S u p -
pose that Slog is reduced and one-pointed. ThenSlog → Y log is scheme-like if and
only if it is a terminal object among the arrows T log → Y log over Y log for which
T log is reduced and one-pointed, and, moreover,T log ×Y log Slog is nonempty.
Proof. Indeed, this is a formal consequence of the observation that the condition
that T log ×Y log Slog be nonempty is equivalent to the condition that T and S have
the same image in Y (cf. Corollary 2.9). ⃝
Corollary 2.14. (Characterization of Arbitrary Scheme-like Morphisms)
Let Y log
1 → Y log
2 be a morphism of objects ofSchlog(Xlog). Then we have the follow-
ing category-theoretic criterion for this morphism to be scheme-like: Y log
1 →
Y log
2 is scheme-like if and only if for every commutative diagram
Slog
1 ↣ Y log
1
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
S
log
2 ↣ Y log
2
of morphisms in Sch(Xlog), where (for i =1 ,2) Slog
i is reduced and one-pointed,
and the horizontal morphisms are scheme-like monomorphisms, it holds that the
morphism Slog
1 → Slog
2 is also scheme-like.
Proof. Indeed, this is a formal consequence of Corollaries 2.12, (ii); 2.13; Lemma
2.2; and Proposition 1.1, (i) (which implies that any open subset ofY1 that contains
the images of all scheme-like monomorphisms Slog
1 → Y log
1 is equal to Y1). ⃝
Corollary 2.15. (Reconstruction of the Underlying Scheme) Let Y log be
an object of Schlog(Xlog). Then the functor
Sch(Y ) → Schlog(Y log)( ⊆ Schlog(Xlog))
{Z → Y }→{ Zlog → Y log}
— deﬁned by equipping Z with the log structure pulled back from Y — determines
an equivalence of categoriesbetween Sch(Y ) and the subcategory ofSchlog(Y log)
of objects Zlog → Y log for which the morphism Zlog → Y log is scheme-like and
morphisms Zlog
1 → Zlog
2 (over Y log) which are scheme-like. In particular, (cf.
Theorem 1.7) one can reconstruct the schemeY category-theoretically from the data
(Schlog(Xlog),Y log) (i.e., of a category and an object in the category) in a fashion
which is functorial in Y log.
Proof. This is a formal consequence of Corollary 2.14 and Theorem 1.7. ⃝

CA TEGORICAL REPRESENT A TION OF LOG SCHEMES 19
Remark 2.15.1. Note that the above proof of Corollary 2.15 furnishes an inter-
esting application of Theorem 1.7, i.e., an interesting instance of anatural situation
in which the category “Sch(Y )” may appear“in disguise”(i.e., as a certain subcate-
gory of Schlog(Y log)). Another (similar) example of the category Sch(Y ) appearing
in disguise is the (classical) theory of (say, faithfully ﬂat) descent: Indeed, suppose
that Y is an S-scheme of ﬁnite type (where S is noetherian), and that T → S
is faithfully ﬂat .T h e n S c h (Y ) “appears in disguise” as the category of objects of
Sch(Y ×S T) equipped with descent data for T → S.
Thus, in order to prove the logarithmic analogue of Theorem 1.7,i tr e m a i n s
only to reconstruct (in a category-theoretic fashion) the log structure on an object
Y log of Schlog(Xlog). To do this, we use the object A1
Y (as in §1), which we equip
with two distinct log structures, as follows: Write
AY log
def
= A1
Z ×Z Y log; Alog
Y log
def
=( A1
Z)log ×Z Y log
where (A1
Z)log is deﬁned to be the aﬃne line A1
Z = Spec(Z[T]) over Z equipped with
the log structure determined by the divisor V (T) (i.e., “the origin”). Thus, (one
veriﬁes easily that) we have a natural morphism
expA : Alog
Z → AZ
whose induced map on Y log-valued points may be naturally identiﬁed with:
expY : MY →O Y
Moreover, (one veriﬁes easily that) the morphism AY ×Y AY → AY that deﬁnes
the multiplication operationon the ring scheme AY → Y admits a unique extension
to a morphism of log schemes over Y log:
Alog
Y log ×Y log Alog
Y
log → Alog
Y log
This morphism induces (on Y log-valued points) the monoid operation on MY .
Lemma 2.16. (Characterization of the Log Structure on the Aﬃne
Line) Let Y log be an object of Schlog(Xlog). Then the arrow Alog
Y log → Y log of
Schlog(Xlog) may be category-theoretically characterized as theunique (up to canon-
ical isomorphism) arrow Zlog → Y log equipped with an identiﬁcation of the under-
lying morphism of schemes (cf. Corollary 2.15) Z → Y with AY → Y satisfying
the following properties:
(i) Away from the zero section of Z → Y , the morphism Zlog → Y log is
scheme-like.

20 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(ii) LetZlog
1 ↣ Zlog, Zlog
2 ↣ Y log be scheme-like monomorphisms, whereZlog
1 ,
Zlog
2 are reduced, one-pointed. Suppose that the composite Zlog
1 → Zlog → Y log
factors through (necessarily uniquely!) Zlog
2 , and that the image of Z1 lies in the
zero section ofZ → Y . Then if the log structure onZlog
2 is trivial, we assume that
Zlog
1 → Zlog
2 is not an isomorphism. On the other hand, if the log structure on
Zlog
2 is nontrivial, we assume that Zlog
1 → Zlog
2 satisﬁes the (category-theoretic)
condition of Lemma 2.17, (ii), below.
(iii) LetT log
0 ↣ T log be a monomorphism of one-pointed objects ofSchlog(Xlog).
Then any commutative diagram
T log
0 −→ Zlog
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
T
log −→ Y log
admits a morphism T log → Zlog such that both of the resulting triangular diagrams
commute.
(iv) There exists aY log-morphism Zlog ×Y log Zlog → Zlog in Schlog(Xlog) whose
induced morphism on underlying schemes is equal to the morphismAY ×Y AY → AY
deﬁning the multiplication operation on AY .
Finally, assuming that all of these conditions (i) — (iv) aresatisﬁed, the morphism
Zlog ×Y log Zlog → Zlog of (iv) is the unique Y log-morphism in Schlog(Xlog) whose
induced morphism on underlying schemes is equal to the morphismAY ×Y AY → AY
deﬁning the multiplication operation on AY .
Proof. First, we observe that condition (ii) of Lemma 2.16 is category-theoretic
— cf. Lemma 2.17, (i), (ii), below. Next, we observe that it suﬃces to determine
the log structure in a formal neighborhood of the zero section of Z → Y .T h u s , i t
suﬃces to replace Z, Y by ´etale localizations of Z, Y such that the zero section
Y → Z is compatible with these ´etale localizations. To keep the notation simple,
we shall denote (for the remainder of this proof) these ´etale localizations (by abuse
of notation) by Z, Y . Thus, we have a morphism of log schemes Z
log → Y log,
together with a “zero section”Y log → Zlog. Also, in the following discussion, weﬁx
ap o i n tz ∈ Z lying in this zero section which is the image of a morphism of ﬁnite
type from a reduced, one-pointed scheme to Z.W r i t ey ∈ Y for the image of z in
Y .
Since we have allowed ourself to pass to ´etale localizations, we may assume
that the morphism Zlog → Y log admits a chart Q → P — where we may assume
that Q (respectively, P) maps bijectively onto PY,y (respectively, PZ,z) (cf. [Kato2],
Lemma 1.6, (2)) — i.e., that we have a commutative diagram
Zlog −→ W log −→ Spec(Z[P])log
↘
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
Y
log −→ Spec(Z[Q])log

CA TEGORICAL REPRESENT A TION OF LOG SCHEMES 21
where W log is deﬁned as the ﬁbered product that makes the square cartesian;
all of the horizontal morphisms are scheme-like; and Spec( Z[P])log, Spec(Z[Q])log
are equipped with the log structures associated to the evident pre-log structures
P → Spec(Z[P]), Q → Spec(Z[Q]). Note that z ↦→ w ∈ W such that the residue
ﬁelds k(z), k(w), k(y)a l lcoincide. Let us denote this ﬁeld by k.
Now let us write ˆW log for the formal completion of W log at w.W r i t eW log
0 ⊆
ˆW log for Spec(k(w)), equipped with the log structure pulled back fromW log.T h e n
it follows formally from the above discussion that the monomorphismW log
0 ↣ W log
factors (uniquely) through Zlog → W log, and that the composite of W log
0 → Zlog
with Zlog → Y log coincides with the composite of W log
0 ↣ W log with W log → Y log.
It thus follows from condition (iii) of Lemma 2.16 that we have a morphism
ˆW log → Zlog
whose composite κ : ˆW log → W log with Zlog → W log restricts to the natural
monomorphism W log
0 ↣ W log on W log
0 , hence induces a morphismˆκ : ˆW log → ˆW log
(which is the identity on W log
0 ). Moreover, (by condition (iii) of Lemma 2.16) we
may choose ˆW log → Zlog so that the composite of κ with W log → Y log is the
natural morphism ˆW log → Y log. It thus follows formally that the scheme-like
endomorphism
ˆκ : ˆW log → ˆW log
is a closed immersion, hence (by the elementary commutative algebra fact that
surjective endomorphisms of noetherian rings are necessarily bijective) an isomor-
phism. In particular, we conclude that if we denote by ˆZlog the formal completion
of Zlog at z, then the morphism ˆW log → Zlog gives rise to a closed immersion
ˆW log ↪→ ˆZlog
whose composite with the natural morphism ˆZlog → ˆW log is ˆκ.
Next, let us denote by ˆW log
y , ˆZlog
y the ﬁbers of ˆW log, ˆZlog over y.T h e n b y
condition (ii) of Lemma 2.16, we have the following inequalities:
1=d i m (ˆZy) ≥ dim(ˆWy) ≥ dim(Spec(Z[P])) − dim(Spec(Z[Q]))
=r k (P gp) − rk(Qgp) ≥ 1
Thus, 1 = dim( ˆZy)=d i m (ˆWy). Moreover, since ˆZy is the formal spectrum of a
power series ring in one variable over the ﬁeld k (a ring which has no nontrivial
dimension one quotients), we thus conclude that the closed immersionˆWy ↪→ ˆZy is,
in fact, an isomorphism. In particular, if we interpret this fact (cf. the deﬁnition

22 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
of W log) in terms of the “power series rings” k[[Q]], k[[P]] (where we note that it
makes sense to consider such power series since Q, P have no nonzero invertible
elements — cf. Proposition 2.1), we conclude that the ﬁber over the closed point
of the range of the morphism
Spf(k[[P]]) → Spf(k[[Q]])
is isomorphic to Spf(k[[T]]) (where T is an indeterminate). That is to say, there
exists a surjection (of complete noetherian rings)
k[[Q]][[T]] ↠ k[[P]]
(where T is an indeterminate). Since k[[Q]][[T]] is a domain — indeed, k[Q]i s
an excellent normal domain , so its completion k[[Q]], being local and normal,i s
necessarily a domain — and dim( k[[Q]][[T]]) = dim(k[[P]]), we thus conclude that
this surjection is, in fact, an isomorphism.
In particular, it follows that the morphism
k[[Q]] → k[[P]]
is ﬂat . This implies — cf. [Kato1], the proof of the implication (iii) = ⇒ (v) of
Proposition 4.1, in which it is clear that “ k[[P]]”, “k[[Q]]” may be substituted for
“ k[P]”, “k[Q]” — that the morphism of monoids Q → P is integral, i.e., satisﬁes
the conditions of [Kato1], Proposition 4.1. Moreover, by condition (ii) of Lemma
2.16; Lemma 2.17, (ii), below, the morphism Qgp → P gp is injective,w i t hnonzero,
torsion-free cokernel. Put another way, we have shown that the morphism
Spec(k[P])log → Spec(k[Q])log
is integral (in the sense of [Kato1], Deﬁnition 4.3), log smooth,a n do f relative
dimension 1. Moreover, the scheme-theoretic ﬁber of this morphism over the k-
point of the range deﬁned by sending all the elements of Q to 0 is smooth over
k. Thus, by the theory of [KatoF] (cf. especially, [KatoF], Theorem 1.1, (2)), we
conclude that the morphism of monoids Q → P may be identiﬁed with the natural
inclusion:
Q↪ → Q × N
Finally, by Lemma 2.18 below (and condition (iv) of Lemma 2.16), we conclude
that the divisor in Z determined by considering the image under MZ →O Z of
the inverse image in MZ of the element 1 ∈ N ⊆ Q × N = P = PZ is equal
(scheme-theoretically) to thezero section. This completes the proof of Lemma 2.16
(including the assertion at the end of the statement of Lemma 2.16). ⃝

CA TEGORICAL REPRESENT A TION OF LOG SCHEMES 23
Lemma 2.17. (Characterization of Trivial and Relatively Nontrivial
Log Structures)
(i) Suppose that Zlog is a reduced, one-pointed object of Schlog(Xlog).T h e n
the condition that the log structure onZlog be trivial may be categeory-theoretically
characterized by the condition that a morphism W log → Zlog in Schlog(Xlog) is
completely determined by the underlying morphism of schemes (cf. Corollary 2.15).
(ii) Let Zlog
1 → Zlog
2 be a log-like morphism between reduced, one-pointed
objects of Schlog(Xlog) with nontrivial log structures. Suppose that the morphism
W log
1 → W log
2 obtained by base-changing this morphism by somescheme-like mor-
phism W log
2 → Zlog
2 between reduced, one-pointed objects of Schlog(Xlog) admits
at least two sections . Then the morphism P gp
Z2 → P gp
Z1 is injective and has a
nonzero, torsion-free cokernel.
Proof. Assertion (i) is a formal consequence of the deﬁnitions and the observa-
tion that if the log structure on Zlog is split and nontrivial,t h e nZlog has lots of
endomorphisms which induce the identity on the underlying scheme Z —g i v e n
by multiplication by a positive integer on PZ.A s f o r assertion (ii),t h e injectiv-
ity of P gp
Z2
→ P gp
Z1
, as well as the fact that its cokernel is torsion-free,i saf o r m a l
consequence of the existence of sections of W log
1 → W log
2 (and Proposition 2.1).
Finally, if this cokernel were zero,t h e nW log
1 → W log
2 would be a monomorphism
(by Proposition 2.3), hence could not admit more than one section. This completes
the proof of assertion (ii). ⃝
Lemma 2.18. (Characterization of the Origin) Let A be an artinian
local ring, with maximal ideal m
A.T h e na n yδ∈ mA such that one has
T1 · T2 − δ∈ (T1 − δ)(T2 − δ) · A[[T1,T 2]]×
(where T1, T2 are indeterminates) is equal to 0.
Proof. Indeed, by induction on the length of A, we may assume (without loss of
generality) that δ ∈ I,f o rs o m eideal I ⊆ A such that I2 =0 . T h e nf o rs o m eunit
u ∈ A[[T1,T 2]]×,w eh a v e :
(T1 · T2 − δ)=( T1 − δ)(T2 − δ) · u
=( T1 · T2 − δ· T1 − δ· T2) · u ∈ A[[T1,T 2]]
Thus, projecting by A[[T1,T 2]] ↠ A (where T1,T 2 ↦→ 0) yields δ= 0, as desired. ⃝
We are now ready to state the main result of the present §:

24 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Theorem 2.19. (Categorical Reconstructibility of Locally Noetherian
Log Schemes) Let Xlog, (X′)log be ﬁne saturated log schemes, whose under-
lying schemes are locally noetherian.
(i) Let flog : Xlog → (X′)log be a morphism of log schemes, whose underlying
morphism of schemes is quasi-compact. Then the functor
Schlog(flog):S c hlog((X′)log) → Schlog(Xlog)
induced by base-change by flog has no nontrivial automorphisms.
(ii) Denote the set of isomorphisms of log schemes Xlog ∼
→ (X′)log by:
Isom(Xlog,(X′)log)
Then the natural map
Isom(Xlog,(X′)log) → Isom(Schlog((X′)log),Schlog(Xlog))
given by flog ↦→ Schlog(flog) is bijective.
Proof. First, we verify assertion (i). It is a formal consequence of Theorem
1.7, (i), that any functorial automorphism of the objects of the essential image
Im(Schlog(flog)) of Schlog((X′)log) is the identity on theunderlying schemes.M o r e -
over, since every automorphism of a log scheme of the form given in Proposition
2.4, (iii), which induces the identity on the underlying scheme necessarily induces
the identity on the characteristic of the log scheme, and the morphisms from such
log schemes (i.e., of the form given in Proposition 2.4, (iii)) to an arbitrary object
(Y
′)log of Schlog((X′)log)a r esuﬃciently abundant to “separate points”(cf. Lemma
2.5, (iii)) of the geometric ﬁbers of the characteristic PY ′ of (Y ′)log, we conclude
that the induced automorphism on thecharacteristic PY ′ is also theidentity.T h u s ,
by functoriality (and the discussion preceding Lemma 2.16), it follows that it suf-
ﬁces to prove that any Y log-linear automorphism βZlog of an arrow Zlog → Y log
satisfying the conditions of Lemma 2.16 such thatβZlog induces the identity on the
underlying schemes and characteristicsis necessarily the identity onZlog. But since
the subobject L× of MZ given by the sheaf of idealsof the zero section — where we
note that this subobject L× is stabilized by βZlog since βZlog induces the identity
on the characteristic PZ — clearly maps injectively via expZ into OZ (and βZlog
induces the identity on OZ), we thus conclude that such anβZlog is the identity on
Zlog, as desired.
Finally, assertion (ii) follows formally — cf. the proof of Theorem 1.7, (ii)
— from assertion (i); Theorem 1.7, (ii); and Lemma 2.16 (cf. also the discussion
preceding Lemma 2.16). ⃝
Finally, we consider the logarithmic analogue of Theorem 1.8:

CA TEGORICAL REPRESENT A TION OF LOG SCHEMES 25
Theorem 2.20. (Further Rigidity Property) Let Xlog be a ﬁne saturated
log scheme, whose underlying scheme is locally noetherian. Suppose that for
every object Y log → Xlog of Schlog(Xlog), one is given an automorphism αY log :
Y log ∼
→ Y log — not necessarily over Xlog! — with the property that for every
morphism Y log
1 → Y log
2 of Schlog(Xlog), one has a commutative diagram:
Y log
1
αY log
1
−→ Y log
1
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
Y
log
2
αY log
2
−→ Y log
2
Then all of the αY log are equal to the identity.
Proof. By Theorem 1.8, everyαY log induces the identity on theunderlying scheme
Y .I np a r t i c u l a r ,αAlog
Y log
induces the identity on the underlying scheme AY .M o r e -
over, just as in the proof of Theorem 2.19, (i), since the characteristic of a log
scheme of the form given in Proposition 2.4, (iii), hasno nontrivial automorphisms,
one concludes — by applying Lemma 2.5, (iii), to “separate points” —t h a tαY log
induces the identity on the characteristic PY . Thus, we conclude (cf. the proof of
Theorem 2.19, (i)) that αY log is the identity, as desired. ⃝

26 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Bibliography
[Bell1] J. L. Bell, Category theory and the foundations of mathematics, British J.
Philos. Sci. 32 (1981), pp. 349-358.
[Bell2] J. L. Bell, Categories, toposes and sets, Synthese 51 (1982), pp. 293-337.
[Bell3] J. L. Bell, From absolute to local mathematics, Synthese 69 (1986), pp. 409-
426.
[Bell4] J. L. Bell, Toposes and Local Set Theories: An Introduction , Oxford Logic
Guides 14, Oxford University Press (1988).
[DM] P. Deligne and D. Mumford, The Irreducibility of the Moduli Space of Curves
of Given Genus, IHES Publ. Math. 36 (1969), pp. 75-109.
[EGA IV] A. Grothendieck, ´El´ements de g´eometrie alg´ebrique. IV: ´Etude locale des sch´emas
et des morphismes de sch´emas, IHES Publ. Math. 20 (1964), 24 (1965), 28
(1966), 32 (1967).
[John] P. T. Johnstone, P. T,Topos theory, London Mathematical Society Monographs
10, Academic Press (1977).
[KatoF] F. Kato, Log Smooth Deformation and Moduli of Log Smooth Curves, The
International Journal of Math. 11 (2000), pp. 215-232.
[Kato1] K. Kato, Logarithmic Structures of Fontaine-Illusie, Proceedings of the First
JAMI Conference, Johns Hopkins Univ. Press (1990), pp. 191-224.
[Kato2] K. Kato, Toric Singularities, Amer. J. Math. 116 (1994), pp. 1073-1099.
[Lwv1] F. W. Lawvere, An elementary theory of the category of sets,Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 52 (1964), pp. 1506-1511.
[Lwv2] F. W. Lawvere, The category of categories as a foundation for mathematics,
1966 Proc. Conf. Categorical Algebra(La Jolla, Calif., USA, 1965), pp. 1-20.
[McLn] S. MacLane, Categories for the working mathematician (Second edition), Grad-
uate Texts in Mathematics 5, Springer-Verlag (1998).
[Mzk] S. Mochizuki, The Local Pro- p Anabelian Geometry of Curves, Invent. Math.
138 (1999), pp. 319-423.
[NTM] H. Nakamura, A. Tamagawa, and S. Mochizuki, The Grothendieck Conjec-
ture on the Fundamental Groups of Algebraic Curves, Sugaku Expositions 14
(2001), pp. 31-53.
[Oda] T. Oda, Lectures on Torus Embeddings and Applications, Springer-Verlag (1978).