A COMBINA TORIAL VERSION OF
THE GROTHENDIECK CONJECTURE
Shinichi Mochizuki
April 2007
/BT/CQ/D7/D8/D6/CP /CR/D8/BA We study the “combinatorial anabelian geometry” that governs the rela-
tionship between the dual semi-graph of a pointed stable curve and various associated
proﬁnite fundamental groups of the pointed stable curve. Although many results of
this type have been obtained previously in various particular situations of interest
under unnecessarily strong hypotheses, the goal of the present paper is to step back
from such “typical situations of interest” and instead to consider this topic in the
abstract — a point of view which allows one to prove results of this type in much
greater generality under very weak hypotheses .
Introduction
In this paper, we apply the language ofanabelioids [cf. [Mzk5], [Mzk7]] to study
the “proﬁnite combinatorial group theory” arising from the relationship between
the semi-graph of anabelioids associated to a pointed stable curve [i.e., a “semi-
graph of anabelioids of PSC-type” — cf. Deﬁnition 1.1, (i), below for more details]
and a certain associated proﬁnite fundamental group [cf. Deﬁnition 1.1, (ii)]. In
particular, we show that:
(i) The cuspidal portion of the semi-graph may be recovered group-theoretical-
ly from the associated proﬁnite fundamental group, together with certain
numerical information [roughly speaking, the number of cusps of the var-
ious ﬁnite ´etale coverings of the given semi-graph of anabelioids] — cf.
Theorem 1.6, (i).
(ii) The entire “semi-graph of anabelioids structure”may be recovered group-
theoretically from the associated proﬁnite fundamental group, together
with a certainﬁltration [arising from this “semi-graph of anabelioids struc-
ture”] of the abelianizations of the various ﬁnite ´etale coverings of the given
semi-graph of anabelioids — cf. Theorem 1.6, (ii).
2000 Mathematical Subject Classiﬁcation. Primary 14H30; Secondary 14H25.
Partly supported by the Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (B), The Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan.
Typeset by AMS-TEX
1

2 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Moreover, we show that from the point of view of “weights” [i.e., logarithms of
absolute values of eigenvalues of the action of the Frobenius element of the Galois
group of a ﬁnite ﬁeld], the data necessary for (i) (respectively, (ii)) above may be
recovered from very weak assumptions concerning the “weights” — cf. Corollary
2.7, (i), (ii). In particular, [unlike the techniques of [Mzk4], Lemmas 1.3.9, 2.3,
for example] these very weak assumptions do not even require the existence of a
particular Frobenius element. Alternatively, when there are no cusps, the data
necessary for (ii) may be recovered from very weak assumptions concerning the l-
adic inertia action [cf. Corollary 2.7, (iii)] — i.e., one does not even need to consider
weights. This sort of result may be regarded as a strengthening of various results
to the eﬀect that a curve has good reduction if and only if thel-adic inertia action
is trivial [cf., e.g., [Tama1], Theorem 0.8].
One consequence of this theory is the result [cf. Corollary 2.7, (iv)] that the
subgroup of the group of outer automorphisms of the associated fundamental group
consisting of the graphic outer automorphisms [i.e., the automorphisms that are
compatible with the “semi-graph of anabelioids structure”] isequal to its own com-
mensurator within the entire group of outer automorphisms. This result may be
regarded as a sort of “anabelian analogue” of a well-known “linear algebra fact”
concerning the general linear group [cf. Remark 2.7.1].
The original motivation for the development of the theory of the present paper
is as follows: Frequently, in discussions of the anabelian geometry of hyperbolic
curves, one ﬁnds it necessary to reconstruct the cusps [cf., e.g., [Naka1], Theorem
3.4; [Mzk4], Lemma 1.3.9; [Tama2], Lemma 2.3, Proposition 2.4] or the entiredual
semi-graph associated to a pointed stable curve [cf., e.g., [Mzk2], §1 – 5; [Mzk4],
Lemma 2.3] group-theoretically from some associated proﬁnite fundamental group.
Moreover, although the techniques for doing this in various diverse situations are
quite similar and only require much weaker assumptionsthan the assumptions that
often hold in particular situations of interest, up till now, there was no uniﬁed
presentation or general results concerning this topic — only a collection of papers
covering various “particular situations of interest”. Thus, the goal of the present
paper is to prove results concerning this topic in maximum possible generality,i n
the hope that this may prove useful in applications to situations not covered in
previous papers [cf., e.g., Corollaries 2.8, 2.9, 2.10; Remarks 2.8.1, 2.8.2].
The author would like to thank Akio Tamagawa for various helpful comments
concerning the material presented in this paper.

A COMBINA TORIAL VERSION OF THE GROTHENDIECK CONJECTURE 3
Section 0: Notation and Conventions
Numbers:
The notation Q will be used to denote the ﬁeld of rational numbers.T h e
notation Z ⊆ Q will be used to denote the set, group, or ring of rational integers.
The notation N ⊆ Z will be used to denote the submonoid of integers ≥ 0. If l is
a prime number, then the notation Ql (respectively, Zl) will be used to denote the
l-adic completion of Q (respectively, Z).
T opological Groups:
Let G be a Hausdorﬀ topological group,a n dH ⊆ G a closed subgroup.L e tu s
write
ZG(H)
def
= {g ∈ G | g · h = h · g for any h ∈ H}
for the centralizer of H in G;
NG(H)
def
= {g ∈ G | g · H · g−1 = H}
for the normalizer of H in G;a n d
CG(H)
def
= {g ∈ G | (g · H · g−1)
⋂
H has ﬁnite index in H, g · H · g−1}
for the commensurator of H in G. Note that: (i) ZG(H), NG(H)a n dCG(H)a r e
subgroups of G; (ii) we have inclusions
H, Z G(H) ⊆ NG(H) ⊆ CG(H)
and (iii) H is normal in NG(H). We shall say that H is centrally (respectively,
normally; commensurably) terminal in G if ZG(H)= H (respectively, NG(H)= H;
CG(H)= H).
We shall denote the group of automorphisms ofG by Aut(G). Conjugation by
elements of G determines a homomorphism G → Aut(G) whose image consists of
the inner automorphisms of G. We shall denote by Out(G) the quotient of Aut(G)
by the [normal] subgroup consisting of the inner automorphisms.
Curves:
Suppose that g ≥ 0i sa n integer.T h e ni fS is a scheme, a family of curves of
genus g
X → S
is deﬁned to be a smooth, proper, geometrically connected morphism of schemes
X → S whose geometric ﬁbers are curves of genus g.

4 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Suppose that g,r ≥ 0a r eintegers such that 2g − 2+ r> 0. We shall denote
the moduli stack of r-pointed stable curves of genusg (where we assume the points
to be unordered)b y
 Mg,r [cf. [DM], [Knud] for an exposition of the theory of such
curves; strictly speaking, [Knud] treats the ﬁnite ´etale covering of
 Mg,r determined
by ordering the marked points]. The open substack Mg,r ⊆
 Mg,r of smooth curves
will be referred to as the moduli stack of smooth r-pointed stable curves of genus g
or, alternatively, as themoduli stack of hyperbolic curves of type(g,r ). The divisor
at inﬁnity
 Mg,r \Mg,r of
 Mg,r determines a log structure on
 Mg,r;d e n o t et h e
resulting log stack by
 M
log
g,r.
A family of hyperbolic curves of type (g,r )
X → S
is deﬁned to be a morphism which factors X↪ → Y → S as the composite of an
open immersion X↪ → Y onto the complement Y \D of a relative divisor D ⊆ Y
which is ﬁnite ´etale over S of relative degree r, and a family Y → S of curves of
genus g. One checks easily that, if S is normal, then the pair (Y,D )i s unique up
to canonical isomorphism. (Indeed, when S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld, this fact is
well-known from the elementary theory of algebraic curves. Next, we consider an
arbitrary connected normal S on which a prime l is invertible (which, by Zariski
localization, we may assume without loss of generality). Denote byS
′ → S the ﬁnite
´etale covering parametrizing orderings of the marked points and trivializations of
the l-torsion points of the Jacobian of Y . Note that S′ → S is independent of
the choice of (Y,D ), since (by the normality of S), S′ may be constructed as the
normalization of S in the function ﬁeld of S′ (which is independent of the choice
of (Y,D ), since the restriction of (Y,D ) to the generic point of S has already been
shown to be unique). Thus, the uniqueness of ( Y,D ) follows by considering the
classifying morphism (associated to ( Y,D )) from S′ to the ﬁnite ´etale covering
of ( Mg,r)Z[1/l] parametrizing orderings of the marked points and trivializations
of the l-torsion points of the Jacobian [since this covering is well-known to be a
scheme, for l suﬃciently large].) We shall refer to Y (respectively, D; D; D)a st h e
compactiﬁcation (respectively, divisor at inﬁnity; divisor of cusps; divisor of marked
points)o f X.A family of hyperbolic curves X → S is deﬁned to be a morphism
X → S such that the restriction of this morphism to each connected component of
S is a family of hyperbolic curves of type (g,r ) for some integers (g,r )a sa b o v e .
Write
Cg,r →
 Mg,r
for the tautological curveover
 Mg,r;
 Dg,r ⊆
 Mg,r for the correspondingtautological
divisor of marked points. The divisor given by the union of
 Dg,r with the inverse
image in
 Cg,r of the divisor at inﬁnity of
 Mg,r determines a log structure on
 Cg,r;
denote the resulting log stack by
 C
log
g,r. Thus, we obtain a morphism of log stacks
C
log
g,r
→
 M
log
g,r

A COMBINA TORIAL VERSION OF THE GROTHENDIECK CONJECTURE 5
which we refer to as thetautological log curveover
 M
log
g,r.I f Slog is any log scheme,
then we shall refer to a morphism
Clog → Slog
which is obtained as the pull-back of the tautological log curve via some [necessarily
uniquely determined — cf., e.g., [Mzk1], §3] classifying morphism Slog →
 M
log
g,r as a
stable log curve.I f C has no nodes, then we shall refer to Clog → Slog as a smooth
log curve.
If XK (respectively, YL)i sa hyperbolic curve over a ﬁeld K (respectively, L),
then we shall say that XK is isogenous to YL if there exists a hyperbolic curve ZM
over a ﬁeld M together with ﬁnite ´etale morphisms ZM → XK, ZM → YL.

6 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Section 1: Criterion for Graphicity
In the present§1, we state and prove a criterion for an isomorphism between the
proﬁnite fundamental groups of pointed stable curves to arise from an isomorphism
of [semi-]graphs of groups. To do this, we shall ﬁnd it convenient to use the language
of anabelioids [cf. [Mzk5]], together with the theory of semi-graphs of anabelioids
of [Mzk7].
Let Σ be a nonempty set of prime numbers. Denote by
ˆZΣ
the pro-Σ completion of Z.L e t G be a semi-graph of anabelioids [cf. [Mzk7],
Deﬁnition 2.1], whose underlying semi-graph we denote byG. Thus, for each vertex
v (respectively, edge e)o f G, we are given a connected anabelioid [i.e., a Galois
category] Gv (respectively, Ge), and for each branch b of an edge e abutting to a
vertex v, we are given a morphism of anabelioids Ge →G v.
Deﬁnition 1.1.
(i) We shall refer to G as being of pro-Σ PSC-type [i.e., “pointed stable curve
type”] if it arises as the pro-Σ completion [cf. [Mzk7], Deﬁnition 2.9, (ii)] of the semi-
graph of anabelioids determined by the “dual semi-graph of proﬁnite groups with
compact structure” [i.e., the object denoted “Gc
X” in the discussion ofpointed stable
curves in [Mzk4], Appendix] of a pointed stable curve over an algebraically closed
ﬁeld whose characteristic ̸∈ Σ. [Thus, the vertices (respectively, closed edges; open
edges) of G correspond to theirreducible components(respectively,nodes; cusps [i.e.,
marked points]) of the pointed stable curve.] We shall refer to G as being of PSC-
type if it is of pro-Σ PSC-type for some nonempty set of prime numbers Σ. IfG is a
semi-graph of anabelioids of PSC-type, then we shall refer to the open (respectively,
closed) edges of the underlying semi-graphG of G as the cusps (respectively, nodes)
of G [or G]a n dw r i t er
(G) (respectively, n
(G)) for the cardinality of the set of cusps
(respectively, nodes) of G;i f r
(G) = 0 (respectively, n
(G) = 0), then we shall say
that G is noncuspidal (respectively, nonnodal). Also, we shall write i
(G) for the
cardinality of the set of vertices of G.
(ii) Suppose that G is of pro-Σ PSC-type. Then we shall denote by
ΠG
and refer to as thePSC-fundamental group of G the maximal pro-Σ quotient of the
proﬁnite fundamental group of G [cf. [Mzk7], the discussion following Deﬁnition
2.2]; we shall refer to a ﬁnite ´etale covering ofG that arises from an open subgroup of
ΠG as a [ﬁnite ´etale] ΠG-covering of G. A vertex (respectively, edge) ofG determines,
up to conjugation, a closed subgroup of Π G; we shall refer to such subgroups as
verticial (respectively, edge-like). An edge-like subgroup that arises from a closed
edge will be referred to as nodal; an edge-like subgroup that arises from an open

A COMBINA TORIAL VERSION OF THE GROTHENDIECK CONJECTURE 7
edge will be referred to as cuspidal.W r i t eMG for the abelianization of Π G.T h e n
the cuspidal, edge-like, and verticial subgroups of ΠG determine submodules
Mcusp
G ⊆ Medge
G ⊆ Mvert
G ⊆ MG
of MG, which we shall refer to as cuspidal, edge-like, and verticial, respectively. We
shall refer to any cyclic ﬁnite ´etale covering of G which arises from a ﬁnite quotient
MG ↠ Q that factors through MG/Mcusp
G and induces a surjectionMedge
G /Mcusp
G ↠
Q as module-wise nodal. If one forms the quotient of Π G by the closed normal
subgroup generated by the cuspidal [cf. the ﬁrst “ ↠” in the following display],
edge-like [cf. the composite of the ﬁrst two “ ↠’s” in the following display], or
verticial [cf. the composite of the three “ ↠’s” in the following display] subgroups,
then one obtains arrows as follows:
ΠG ↠ Πcpt
G ↠ Πunr
G ↠ Πgrph
G
We shall refer to Πcpt
G
(respectively, Πunr
G ;Π grph
G )a st h ecompactiﬁed (respectively,
unramiﬁed; graph-theoretic)q u o t i e n to fΠG. We shall refer to a Π G-covering of G
that arises from an open subgroup of Π cpt
G (respectively, Πunr
G ;Π grph
G )a saΠ cpt
G
-
(respectively, Πunr
G -; Πgrph
G -) covering of G. We shall refer to the images of the ver-
ticial (respectively, verticial; edge-like) subgroups of ΠG in Πcpt
G (respectively, Πunr
G ;
Πcpt
G )a st h e compactiﬁed verticial (respectively, unramiﬁed verticial; compactiﬁed
edge-like) subgroups. If the abelianization of every unramiﬁed verticial subgroup
of Πunr
G is free of rank ≥ 2o v e rˆZΣ, then we shall say that G is sturdy.
Remark 1.1.1. It is immediate from the deﬁnitions that any connected ﬁnite
´etale covering of a semi-graph of anabelioids of PSC-type is again a semi-graph of
anabelioids of PSC-type.
Remark 1.1.2. Note that if G is a semi-graph of anabelioids of pro-Σ PSC-type,
with associated PSC-fundamental group Π G,t h e nΣm a yb erecoveredeither from
ΠG or from any verticial or edge-like subgroup of Π G as the set of prime numbers
that occur as factors of orders of ﬁnite quotients of Π G or a verticial or edge-like
subgroup of ΠG.
Remark 1.1.3. It is immediate [cf. the discussion in [Mzk4], Appendix] that Π G
is the pro-Σ fundamental group of somehyperbolic curveover an algebraically closed
ﬁeld of characteristic ̸∈ Σ [or, alternatively, of some hyperbolic Riemann surface of
ﬁnite type], and that every open subgroup of an edge-like (respectively, verticial)
subgroup of Π G is isomorphic to ˆZΣ (respectively, nonabelian). In particular, [by
[Naka2], Corollary 1.3.4] Π G is center-free [cf. also [Mzk4], Lemma 1.3.1, for the
case where Σ is the set of all prime numbers; the case of arbitrary Σ may be proven
similarly]. Moreover, G has cusps if and only if ΠG is a ﬁnitely generated, free pro-Σ
group. On the other hand, Πgrph
G is naturally isomorphic to the pro-Σ fundamental

8 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
group of the underlying semi-graph G. In particular, Π grph
G is a ﬁnitely generated,
free pro-Σ group of rank n
(G) − i
(G)+1 .
Remark 1.1.4. It is immediate from the well-known structure of fundamen-
tal groups of Riemann surfaces that, in the notation of Deﬁnition 1.1, (ii), the
ˆZΣ-modules MG, MG/Mcusp
G [i.e., the abelianization of Π cpt
G
], MG/Mvert
G [i.e., the
abelianization of Πgrph
G ], Mvert
G /Medge
G [i.e., the direct sum, over the set of vertices
of G, of the abelianizations of the corresponding unramiﬁed verticial subgroups of
Πunr
G ] are all free and ﬁnitely generated over ˆZΣ. That is to say, all of the subquo-
tients of the following ﬁltration are free and ﬁnitely generated over ˆZΣ:
Mcusp
G ⊆ Medge
G ⊆ Mvert
G ⊆ MG
Remark 1.1.5. From the point of view of Deﬁnition 1.1, (i), the condition that
a semi-graph of anabelioids G of PSC-type be sturdy corresponds to the condition
that every irreducible component of the pointed stable curve that gives rise toG be
of genus ≥ 2. [Indeed, this follows immediately from the well-known structure of
fundamental groups of Riemann surfaces.] In particular, one veriﬁes immediately
that, even if G is not sturdy, there always exists a characteristic open subgroup
H ⊆ ΠG which satisﬁes the following property: Every G′ which arises as a Π G-
covering G′ →G such that ΠG′ ⊆ H ⊆ ΠG is sturdy. In fact, [it is a routine exercise
to show that] one may evenbound the index [ΠG : H] explicitly in terms of say, the
rank [over ˆZΣ]o f MG.
Remark 1.1.6. Suppose that G is sturdy. Then observe that the quotient
ΠG ↠ Πcpt
G determines a new semi-graph of anabelioids G′ of PSC-type, which we
shall refer to as thecompactiﬁcation of G. That is to say, the underlying semi-graph
G′ of G′ is obtained from the underlying semi-graph G of G by omitting the cusps.
The anabelioids at the vertices and edges of G′ are then obtained from G as the
subcategories of the corresponding anabelioids of G determined by the quotients of
the corresponding verticial and edge-like subgroups of ΠG induced by the quotient
ΠG ↠ Πcpt
G . Thus, it follows immediately that we obtain a natural isomorphism
Πcpt
G
∼
→ ΠG′ .
Proposition 1.2. (Commensurable T erminality) Suppose that G is of PSC-
type, with associated PSC-fundamental group ΠG.F o r i =1 , 2,l e tAi ⊆ ΠG be a
verticial (respectively, edge-like) subgroup ofΠG arising from a vertexvi (respec-
tively, an edge ei)o f ΠG; write Bi for the image of Ai in Πunr
G . Then the following
hold.
(i) If A1
⋂A2 is open in A1,t h e nv1 = v2 (respectively, e1 = e2). In the non-
resp’d case, under the further assumption that G is sturdy,i f B1
⋂ B2 is open in
B1,t h e nv1 = v2.
(ii) The Ai are commensurably terminal [cf. §0] in ΠG. In the non-resp’d
case, under the further assumption that G is sturdy,t h eBi are commensurably
terminal in Πunr
G .

A COMBINA TORIAL VERSION OF THE GROTHENDIECK CONJECTURE 9
Proof. First, we observe that assertion (ii) follows formally from assertion (i) [cf.
the derivation of [Mzk7], Corollary 2.7, (i), from [Mzk7], Proposition 2.6]. Now the
proof of assertion (i) is entirely similar to the proof of [Mzk7], Proposition 2.6: That
is to say, upon translating the group-theory of Π G into the language of ﬁnite ´etale
coverings of G and possibly replacing G by some ﬁnite ´etale covering of G [which
allows us, in particular, to replace the words “open in” in assertion (i) by the words
“equal to”], one sees that to prove assertions (i), (ii), it suﬃces to prove, under the
further assumption that G is sturdy [cf. Remark 1.1.5], that if v1 ̸= v2 (respectively,
e1 ̸= e2), then there exists a ﬁnite ´etale Πunr
G - (respectively, ΠG-) covering G′ →G
whose restriction to the anabelioid Gv2 (respectively, Ge2 )i s trivial [i.e., isomorphic
to a disjoint union of copies of Gv2 (respectively, Ge2 )], but whose restriction to
the anabelioid Gv1 (respectively, Ge1 )i s nontrivial. But, in light of our assumption
that G is sturdy, one veriﬁes immediately that by gluing together appropriate ﬁnite
´etale coverings of the anabelioids Gv, Ge, one may construct a ﬁnite ´etale covering
G′ →G with the desired properties. □
Proposition 1.3. (Duality) Let G be a noncuspidal semi-graph of anabelioids
of PSC-type. Then the cup product in group cohomology
H1(ΠG, ˆZΣ) × H1(ΠG, ˆZΣ) → H2(ΠG, ˆZΣ) ∼= ˆZΣ
determines a perfect pairing on MG ∼= Hom(H1(ΠG, ˆZΣ), ˆZΣ), well-deﬁned up to
multiplication by a unit of ˆZΣ. Moreover, relative to this perfect pairing, the sub-
modules Medge
G , Mvert
G of MG are mutual annihilators.
Proof. Since G is noncuspidal, it follows [cf. Remark 1.1.3] that Π G is the pro-Σ
fundamental group of some compact Riemann surface, so the existence of a perfect
pairing as asserted follows from the well-knownPoincar´ed u a l i t yof such a compact
Riemann surface. To see that the submodules Medge
G , Mvert
G of MG are mutual
annihilators, we reason as follows: Since the isomorphism class of G is manifestly
determined by purely combinatorial data, we may assume without loss of generality
[by possibly replacing G by the “pro-Σ ′ completion” of G, for some subset Σ′ ⊆ Σ]
that G arises from a stable curve over aﬁnite ﬁeld k whose characteristic ̸∈ Σ. Write
q for the cardinality ofk; Gk for theabsolute Galois groupof k. We shall say that an
action of Gk on a ﬁnitely generated, free ˆZΣ-module is ofweight w if the eigenvalues
of the Frobenius element ∈ Gk are algebraic integers all of whose complex absolute
values are equal to qw/2. Now one has a natural action of Gk on G [cf. Remark
2.5.1 below for a more detailed description of this action], and hence a natural
action on MG which preserves Medge
G , Mvert
G . By replacing k by a ﬁnite extension
of k, we may assume that Gk acts trivially on the underlying semi-graph G.T h u s ,
the action of Gk on MG/Mvert
G (respectively, Medge
G )i s trivial [cf. Remark 1.1.3]
(respectively, of weight 2). On the other hand, by the “Riemann hypothesis” for
abelian varieties over ﬁnite ﬁelds [cf., e.g., [Mumf], p. 206], it follows [cf. Remark
1.1.4] that the action ofGk on Mvert
G /Medge
G is of weight 1. Note, moreover, that the
action of Gk on H2(ΠG, ˆZΣ)i so f weight −2. [Indeed, this follows by considering

10 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
the ﬁrst Chern class [cf., e.g., [FK], Chapter II, Deﬁnition 1.2] of a line bundle
of degree one on some irreducible component of the given stable curve over k —
cf., e.g., [Mzk4], the proof of Lemma 2.6.] Thus, since the subquotients of the
ﬁltration Medge
G ⊆ Mvert
G ⊆ MG are all free over ˆZΣ, the fact that Medge
G and Mvert
G
are mutual annihilators follows immediately by consideration of the weights of the
modules involved. □
Remark 1.3.1. By Proposition 1.3 [applied to the semi-graph of anabelioids of
PSC-type G′ obtained by “compactifying” G — cf. Remark 1.1.6], it follows that
if G is a [not necessarily noncuspidal!] sturdy semi-graph of anabelioids of PSC-
type, then the ranks [over ˆZΣ]o f Medge
G /Mcusp
G , MG/Mvert
G coincide. This implies
that the rank [over ˆZΣ]o f Mcusp
G may be computed as the diﬀerence between the
ranks [over ˆZΣ]o f Medge
G , MG/Mvert
G . Moreover, it follows immediately from the
deﬁnitions that if G has cusps, then the rank of Mcusp
G is equal to r
(G) − 1. Also,
[again it follows immediately from the deﬁnitions that] G is noncuspidal if and only
if Mcusp
G′ = 0 for all ﬁnite ´etale ΠG-coverings G′ →G . Thus, in summary, it follows
that one may compute r
(G) as soon as one knows the diﬀerencebetween the ranks
[over ˆZΣ]o f Medge
G′ , MG′ /Mvert
G′ for all ﬁnite ´etale ΠG-coverings G′ →G .
Deﬁnition 1.4. Suppose that G, H are of PSC-type; denote the respective
associated PSC-fundamental groups by ΠG,Π H and the respective underlying semi-
graphs by G, H.L e t
α :Π G
∼
→ ΠH; β :Π unr
G
∼
→ Πunr
H
be isomorphisms of proﬁnite groups.
(i) We shall say thatα is graphic if it arises from an isomorphism of semi-graphs
of anabelioids G
∼
→H .
(ii) We shall say that α is numerically cuspidal if, for any pair of ﬁnite ´etale
coverings G′ →G , H′ →H which correspond via α,w eh a v er
(G′)= r
(H′).
(iii) We shall say that α is graphically ﬁltration-preserving (respectively, verti-
cially ﬁltration-preserving ; edge-wise ﬁltration-preserving) if, for any pair of ﬁnite
´etale coverings G′ →G , H′ →H which correspond via α, the isomorphism
MG′
∼
→ MH′
induced by α induces an isomorphism between the respective verticial and edge-
like (respectively, verticial; edge-like) submodules. We shall say thatβ is verticially
ﬁltration-preserving if, for any pair of ﬁnite ´etale coverings G′ →G , H′ →H which
correspond via β, the isomorphism
MG′ /Medge
G′
∼
→ MH′ /Medge
H′
induced by β induces an isomorphism Mvert
G′ /Medge
G′
∼
→ Mvert
H′ /Medge
H′ .

A COMBINA TORIAL VERSION OF THE GROTHENDIECK CONJECTURE 11
(iv) We shall say that α is group-theoretically cuspidal (respectively, group-
theoretically edge-like; group-theoretically verticial) if and only if it maps each cusp-
idal (respectively, edge-like; verticial) subgroup of ΠG isomorphically onto a cuspidal
(respectively, edge-like; verticial) subgroup of Π H, and, moreover, every cuspidal
(respectively, edge-like; verticial) subgroup of Π H arises in this fashion. We shall
say that β is group-theoretically verticial if and only if it maps each unramiﬁed
verticial subgroup of Πunr
G isomorphically onto an unramiﬁed verticial subgroup of
Πunr
H , and, moreover, every verticial subgroup of Πunr
H
arises in this fashion.
(v) Let G′ →G be a Galois ﬁnite ´etale covering. Then we shall say thatG′ →G
is cuspidally (respectively, nodally; verticially) purely totally ramiﬁed if there exists
ac u s pe (respectively, node e;v e r t e xv)o f G such that G′ →G restricts to a trivial
covering over Ge′ (respectively, Ge′ ; Gv′ ) for all cusps e′ ̸= e (respectively, nodes
e′ ̸= e; vertices v′ ̸= v)o f G and to a connected covering over Ge (respectively,
Ge; Gv). We shall say that G′ →G is cuspidally (respectively, nodally; verticially)
totally ramiﬁed if there exists a cusp e (respectively, node e;v e r t e xv)o f G such
that G′ →G restricts to a connected covering over Ge (respectively, Ge; Gv).
(vi) If A ⊆ ΠG is a closed subgroup, andA′ ⊆ A is an open subgroup ofA,t h e n
we shall say that the inclusion A′ ⊆ A descends to a ﬁnite ´etale covering G′ →G ′′
if the arrow G′ →G ′′ is a morphism of ﬁnite ´etale ΠG-coverings of G such that the
corresponding open subgroups Π G′ ⊆ ΠG′′ ⊆ ΠG satisfy A ⊆ ΠG′′ , A ⋂ΠG′ = A′,
[A : A′]=[ Π G′′ :Π G′ ]. We shall use similar terminology when, in the preceding
sentence, “Π” is replaced by “Π unr”.
Remark 1.4.1. Thus, by Proposition 1.3, it follows that, if, in the notation of
Deﬁnition 1.4, G, H are noncuspidal, then the following three conditions on α are
equivalent:( a ) α is graphically ﬁltration-preserving;( b ) α is verticially ﬁltration-
preserving;( c )α is edge-wise ﬁltration-preserving.
Remark 1.4.2. Let G′ →G be a Galois ﬁnite ´etale covering of degree a power
of l,w h e r eG is of pro-Σ PSC-type, Σ = {l}. Then one veriﬁes immediately that
G′ →G is cuspidally purely totally ramiﬁed if and only if the equality
r
(G′)=d e g (G′/G) · (r
(G) − 1) + 1
is satisﬁed. Similarly, if G′ →G is a ﬁnite ´etale Πunr
G -covering [so n
(G′)= n
(G) ·
deg(G′/G)], then one veriﬁes immediately that G′ →G is verticially purely totally
ramiﬁed if and only if the equality
i
(G′)=d e g (G′/G) · (i
(G) − 1) + 1
is satisﬁed. Also, we observe that this last equality is equivalent to the following
equality involving the expression “i
(... ) − n
(... )” [cf. Remark 1.1.3]:
i
(G′) − n
(G′)=d e g (G′/G) · (i
(G) − n
(G) − 1) + 1

12 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Remark 1.4.3. Let G′ →G be as in Remark 1.4.2; assume further that this
covering is a cuspidally (respectively, nodally; verticially) totally ramiﬁed ΠG-( r e -
spectively, Π G-; Π unr
G -) covering,a n dt h a tG is arbitrary (respectively, arbitrary;
sturdy). Let e (respectively, e; v) be a cusp (respectively, node; vertex) of G such
that G′ →G restricts to a connected covering of Ge (respectively, Ge; Gv). Then
observe that:
There exists a ﬁnite ´etale ΠG- (respectively, ΠG-; Πunr
G -) covering G′′ →G
such that: (a) G′′ →G is trivial over Ge (respectively, Ge; Gv); (b) the
subcovering G′′′ →G ′′ of the composite covering G′′′ →G of the coverings
G′′ →G and G′ →G is cuspidally (respectively, nodally; verticially) purely
totally ramiﬁed.
Indeed, the construction of such a covering is immediate [cf. the proof of Proposition
1.2].
Remark 1.4.4. Let G′ →G be as in Remark 1.4.2; assume further that this
covering is cyclic,a n dt h a tG is noncuspidal. Then it is immediate that G′ →G
is module-wise nodal if and only if it is nodally totally ramiﬁed . In particular, it
follows that:
(i) Any closed subgroup B ⊆ ΠG is contained in some nodal edge-like sub-
group if and only if, for every open normal subgroupB′ ⊆ B, the inclusion
B′ ⊆ B descends to a module-wise nodal ﬁnite ´etale covering.
(ii) A closed subgroup A ⊆ ΠG is a nodal edge-like subgroupof ΠG if and only
if it satisﬁes the condition of (i) above [i.e., where one takes “B”t ob eA],
and, moreover, ismaximal among closed subgroups B ⊆ ΠG satisfying the
condition of (i).
Indeed, the necessity of (i) is immediate. The suﬃciency of (i) follows by observing
that since the set of nodes of a ﬁnite ´etale covering ofG is alwaysﬁnite , an exhaustive
collection of open normal subgroups of B thus determines — by considering the
nodes at which the “total ramiﬁcation” occurs — [at least one] compatible system
of nodes of the ﬁnite ´etale ΠG-coverings of G; but this implies that B is contained
in some nodal edge-like subgroup. In light of (i), the necessity of (ii) is immediate
from the deﬁnitions and Proposition 1.2, (i) [which implies maximality], while the
suﬃciency of (ii) follows immediately from the assumption of maximality.
Proposition 1.5. (Incidence Relations) We maintain the notation of Deﬁ-
nition 1.4. Then the following hold.
(i) An edge-like subgroup of ΠG is cuspidal (respectively, not cuspidal )i f
and only if it is contained inprecisely one (respectively, precisely two) verticial
subgroup(s).

A COMBINA TORIAL VERSION OF THE GROTHENDIECK CONJECTURE 13
(ii) α is graphic if and only if it is group-theoretically edge-like and
group-theoretically verticial . Moreover, in this case, α arises from a unique
isomorphism of semi-graphs of anabelioids G
∼
→H .
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). Observe that it is immediate from the
deﬁnitions that a cuspidal (respectively, noncuspidal) edge-like subgroup of Π G is
contained in at least one (respectively, at least two) verticial subgroup(s).T op r o v e
that these lower bounds also serve as upper bounds, it suﬃces [by possibly replacing
G by a ﬁnite ´etale covering of G] to show that ife is a cuspidal (respectively, nodal)
edge of G that doesnot abut to a vertexv, then there exists a ﬁnite ´etale ΠG-covering
G′ →G which is trivial over Gv, but nontrivial over Ge. But this is immediate [cf.
the proof of Proposition 1.2, (i)].
Next, we consider assertion (ii). Necessity is immediate. To prove suﬃciency,
we reason as follows: The assumption that α is group-theoretically edge-like and
group-theoretically verticialimplies, by considering conjugacy classes of verticial and
edge-like subgroups [and applying Proposition 1.2, (i)], that α induces a bijection
between the vertices (respectively, edges) of the underlying semi-graphs G, H.B y
assertion (i), this bijection maps cuspidal (respectively, nodal) edges to cuspidal
(respectively, nodal) edges and is compatible with the various“incidence relations”
that deﬁne the semi-graph structure [i.e., the data of which vertices an edge abuts
to]. Thus, α induces an isomorphism of semi-graphsG
∼
→ H. Finally, by Proposition
1.2, (ii), one concludes thatα arises from a unique isomorphism G
∼
→H , as desired.
□
Theorem 1.6. (Criterion for Graphicity) We maintain the notation of
Deﬁnition 1.4. Then the following hold.
(i) α is numerically cuspidal if and only if it is group-theoretically cus-
pidal.
(ii) α is graphic if and only if it is graphically ﬁltration-preserving .
(iii) Assume that G, H are sturdy.T h e nβ is verticially ﬁltration-preser-
ving if and only if it is group-theoretically verticial.
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). Suﬃciency is immediate [cf. Proposition
1.2, (i)]. The proof of necessity is entirely similar to the latter half of the proof of
[Mzk4], Lemma 1.3.9: Let l ∈ Σ[ w h e r eG, H are of pro-Σ PSC-type]. Since the
cuspidal edge-like subgroups may be recovered as the stabilizers of cusps of ﬁnite
´etale coverings of G, H, it suﬃces to show that α induces a functorial bijection
between the sets of cusps of G, H. In particular, we may assume, without loss of
generality, that Σ = {l}.
Then given pairs of ﬁnite ´etale ΠG-o rΠ H-coverings that correspond via α
G′′ →G ′ →G ; H′′ →H ′ →H

14 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
such that G′′ is Galois over G′,a n d H′′ is Galois over H′, it follows from the
assumption that α is numerically cuspidal that G′′ →G ′ is cuspidally purely totally
ramiﬁed if and only if H′′ →H ′ is [cf. Remark 1.4.2]. Now observe that the
cuspidal edge-like subgroups of Π G (respectively, Π H) are precisely the maximal
closed subgroupsA such that, for every open normal subgroupA′ ⊆ A, the inclusion
A′ ⊆ A descends to a cuspidally purely totally ramiﬁed Galois ﬁnite ´etale covering.
Indeed, in light of Remark 1.4.3 [which implies that, in the preceding sentence,
one may remove the word “purely” without aﬀecting the validity of the assertion
contained in this sentence], this follows by a similar argument to the argument
applied in the case of nodes in Remark 1.4.4. Thus, we thus conclude that α is
group-theoretically cuspidal, as desired.
Next, we consider assertion (ii). Necessity is immediate. To prove suﬃciency,
l e tu sﬁ r s to b s e r v et h a tb yfunctoriality; Proposition 1.2, (ii); Proposition 1.5, (ii),
it follows that we may alwaysreplace G, H by ﬁnite ´etale Π
G-o rΠ H-coverings that
correspond via α. In particular, by Remark 1.1.5, we may assume without loss
of generality that G, H are sturdy. Next, let us observe that by Proposition 1.3
[cf. Remark 1.3.1], the assumption thatα is graphically ﬁltration-preserving implies
that α is numerically cuspidal, hence [by assertion (i)] that α is group-theoretically
cuspidal. Thus, by replacing G, H by their respectivecompactiﬁcations [cf. Remark
1.1.6], and replacing α by the isomorphism induced by α between the respective
quotients ΠG ↠ Πcpt
G ,Π H ↠ Πcpt
H , we may assume, without loss of generality, that
G, H are noncuspidal and sturdy. Also, as in the proof of assertion (i), we may
assume that Σ = {l}. Now by Proposition 1.5, (ii), it suﬃces to prove that α is
group-theoretically edge-likeand group-theoretically verticial. But by Remark 1.4.4,
the assumption that α is edge-wise ﬁltration-preserving implies that α is group-
theoretically edge-like.I n p a r t i c u l a r ,α induces a verticially ﬁltration-preserving
isomorphism Πunr
G
∼
→ Πunr
H . Now to prove that α is group-theoretically verticial,i t
suﬃces to prove [cf. the proof of assertion (i)] that α induces a functorial bijection
between the sets of vertices of G, H. Thus, to complete the proof of assertion (ii),
it suﬃces to prove that β is group-theoretically verticial, that is to say, it suﬃces to
verify assertion (iii).
Finally, we consider assertion (iii). Suﬃciency is immediate. On the other
hand, necessity follows from Remark 1.4.2, by observing that the unramiﬁed verti-
cial subgroups are precisely the maximal closed subgroups A of Πunr
G or Πunr
H
such
that, for every open normal subgroup A′ ⊆ A, the inclusion A′ ⊆ A descends to
a verticially purely totally ramiﬁed Galois ﬁnite ´ etale covering. Indeed, in light
of Remark 1.4.3 [which implies that, in the preceding sentence, one may remove
the word “purely” without aﬀecting the validity of the assertion contained in this
sentence], this follows by a similar argument to the argument applied in the case of
nodes in Remark 1.4.4. This completes the proof of assertion (ii). □
Remark 1.6.1. The essential content of Theorem 1.6, (i), is, in many respects,
similar to the essential content of [Tama2], Lemma 2.3 [cf. the use of this lemma
in [Tama2], Proposition 2.4].

A COMBINA TORIAL VERSION OF THE GROTHENDIECK CONJECTURE 15
Section 2: The Group of Graphic Outer Automorphisms
In this §, we study the consequences of the theory of §1 for the group of
automorphisms of a semi-graph of anabelioids of PSC-type.
Let G be a semi-graph of anabelioids of pro-Σ PSC-type [with underlying semi-
graph G]. In the following discussion, G, G will remain ﬁxed until further notice to
the contrary [in Corollary 2.7].
Denote by Aut(G) the group of automorphisms of the semi-graph of anabelioids
G. Here, we recall that an automorphism of a semi-graph of anabelioids consists of
an automorphism of the underlying semi-graph, together with a compatible system
of isomorphisms between the various anabelioids at each of the vertices and edges
of the underlying semi-graph, which are compatible with the various morphisms of
anabelioids associated to the branches of the underlying semi-graph — cf. [Mzk7],
Deﬁnition 2.1; [Mzk7], Remark 2.4.2. Then, by Proposition 1.5, (ii), we obtain an
injective homomorphism
Aut(G) ↪→ Out(ΠG)
whose image we shall denote by
Outgrph(ΠG) ⊆ Out(ΠG)
and refer to as the group of graphic outer automorphisms of ΠG.S i n c eΠG is topo-
logically ﬁnitely generated [cf. Remark 1.1.3], it follows that Out(Π G) is equipped
with a natural proﬁnite topology, which thus induces anatural topologyon the sub-
group Outgrph(ΠG) ⊆ Out(ΠG), which is manifestly closed, by Proposition 1.5, (ii).
In particular, Aut(G) ∼= Outgrph(ΠG) is equipped with a natural proﬁnite topology.
Since Π G is center-free [cf. Remark 1.1.3], we have a natural exact sequence
1 → ΠG → Aut(ΠG) → Out(ΠG) → 1, which we may pull-back via Aut( G) ↪→
Out(ΠG) to obtain an exact sequence as follows:
1 → ΠG → ΠAut
G → Aut(G) → 1
If G′ →G is a sturdy [i.e., G′ is sturdy] ﬁnite ´etale ΠG-covering which arises from a
characteristic open subgroup Π G′ ⊆ ΠG, then there is a natural action of ΠAut
G on
G′. In particular, we obtain, for every l ∈ Σ, a natural action of Π Aut
G on the free
Zl-module of rank one [i.e., since G′ is sturdy] H2(Πcpt
G′ , Zl).
Lemma 2.1. (Construction of the Cyclotomic Character) This ac-
tion of ΠAut
G on H2(Πcpt
G′ , Zl) factors through the quotient ΠAut
G ↠ Aut(G),h e n c e
determines a continuous homomorphism Aut(G) → Z×
l , whose inverse
χl :A u t (G) → Z×
l
we shall refer to as the pro-l cyclotomic character of Aut(G). Moreover, this
character is independent of the choice of sturdy ΠG-covering G′ →G .

16 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Proof. To verify the asserted independence of covering, it suﬃces to observe that
any two sturdy ΠG-coverings G′ →G , G′′ →G may be dominated by a third sturdy
ΠG-covering G′′′ →G , which induce isomorphisms of free Ql-modules of rank one
H2(Πcpt
G′ , Zl) ⊗ Q → H2(Πcpt
G′′′ , Zl) ⊗ Q; H2(Πcpt
G′′ , Zl) ⊗ Q → H2(Πcpt
G′′′ , Zl) ⊗ Q
which are compatible with the various actions by ΠAut
G .
To show that the action of Π Aut
G factors through Aut( G), we may assume
without loss of generality that Σ is the set of all primes . On the other hand, by
the independence of covering already veriﬁed, it follows that we may compute the
ΠAut
G -action in question by using a coveringG′ →G of degreeprime to l(l−1). Since
the action in question amounts to a continuous homomorphism ΠAut
G → Z×
l which
clearly factors through Π Aut
G /ΠG′ , the desired factorization follows from the fact
that [consideration of orders implies that] every homomorphism Gal( G′/G) → Z×
l
is trivial. □
Proposition 2.2. (The Double of a Semi-Graph of Anabelioids of PSC-
type) Suppose that r
(G) ̸=0 .L e t H be the semi-graph of anabelioids deﬁned
as follows: The underlying semi-graph H is obtained by taking the disjoint union
of two copies of G and, for each cusp e of G abutting to a vertex v of G, replacing
the corresponding pairs of cusps lying in these two copies of G by a node [i.e., a
closed edge] that joins the pairs of vertices corresponding to v in these two copies.
We shall refer to the newly appended nodes as bridges. Away from the bridges,
we take the semi-graph of anabelioids structure of H to be the structure induced
by G, and, at each branch of a bridge of H, we take the semi-graph of anabelioids
structure of H to be the structure induced byG at the corresponding cuspe of G,b y
gluing the two copies of Ge in question by means of the inversion automorphism
Ge →G e [induced by “multiplication by −1” on the abelian fundamental group of
Ge]. We shall refer to H as the double of G. Then the following hold.
(i) H is a noncuspidal semi-graph of anabelioids of PSC-type .
(ii) Restriction of ﬁnite ´etale coverings of H to each of the copies of G used to
construct H determines a natural injective continuous outer homomorphism
ΠG ↪→ ΠH.
(iii) The homomorphism of (ii) maps verticial (respectively, edge-like)s u b -
groups of ΠG isomorphically onto verticial (respectively, edge-like) subgroups ofΠH.
(iv) The homomorphism of (ii) induces an injection
MG ↪→ MH
that maps Medge
G (respectively, Mvert
G ) into Medge
H (respectively, Mvert
H ).
Proof. Assertion (i) is immediate from the deﬁnitions. Note, relative to Deﬁnition
1.1, (i), that there is a corresponding construction of a “double” of a pointed stable

A COMBINA TORIAL VERSION OF THE GROTHENDIECK CONJECTURE 17
curve. This explains the need for “gluing by means of the inversion automorphism”
in the deﬁnition of H: Over, say, a complete discrete valuation ring A with alge-
braically closed residue ﬁeld, the completion of a generically smooth pointed stable
curve at a node is isomorphic to the formal spectrum of the complete local ring
A[[x, y]]/(xy − s), where x, y are indeterminates and s lies in the maximal ideal
of A. Then the action of the local tame Galois group at each of the branches of
the node considered independently is of the form x ↦→ ζ · x, y ↦→ ζ · y,w h e r eζ
is some root of unity. On the other hand, since the Galois action on coverings of
the entire formal spectrum of A[[x, y]]/(xy − s) [i.e., where one does not treat the
branches of the node independently] necessarilyﬁxes elements of the base ring [i.e.,
the normalization of A in some ﬁnite extension of its quotient ﬁeld], it follows that
this action must be of the form x ↦→ ζ· x, y ↦→ ζ−1 · y.
As for assertion (ii), it is immediate that we obtain a natural homomorphism
ΠG → ΠH. The asserted injectivity may be veriﬁed as follows [cf. also the proof
of injectivity in [Mzk7], Proposition 2.5, (i)]: Given any ﬁnite ´ etale Π G-covering
G′ →G , one may construct a ﬁnite ´ etale Π H-covering H′ →H which induces
G′ →G via the “restriction procedure” of (ii) by gluing together two copies of G′
over the two copies of G used to construct H. Note that to carry out this gluing,
one must choose a [noncanonical!] isomorphism, at each cusp e of G, between the
restriction of G′ →G to Ge and the pull-back via the inversion automorphism of
this restriction. [Note that it is immediate that such an isomorphism always exists.]
Assertion (iii) is immediate from the construction of the double.
Finally, we consider assertion (iv). To verify that the homomorphism MG →
MH induced by the homomorphism of (ii) is an injection, it suﬃces to observe that
the gluing procedure discussed in the proof of the injectivity of (ii) determines a
splitting of the homomorphism MG → MH. Indeed, if the ﬁnite ´etale Π G-covering
G′ →G in question is abelian, with Galois group A, then the resulting H′ →H
admits a natural action by A, by letting A act via the identity A → A on one
copy of G′ and via “multiplication by −1” A → A on the other copy of G′. [Put
another way, if we think of the covering G′ →G as corresponding to the A-set A,
then we glue the set A to the set A at the bridges by means of the automorphism
“multiplication by −1”.] This completes the proof of injectivity. The fact that this
injection maps Medge
G (respectively, Mvert
G )i n t oMedge
H (respectively, Mvert
H ) follows
immediately from assertion (iii). □
Remark 2.2.1. Certain aspects of Proposition 2.2 are related to the results of
[Asada].
Remark 2.2.2. It is quite possible that various aspects of Proposition 2.2 may
be generalized from the case of “two copies of G” treated in Proposition 2.2 to the
case of gluing together arbitrary ﬁnite collections of semi-graphs of anabelioids of
PSC-type. This topic, however, lies beyond the scope of the present paper.
Deﬁnition 2.3. Let J be a proﬁnite group which acts continuously on G [i.e.,

18 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
we are given a continuous homomorphism J → Aut(G)]. Set:
ΠJ
G
def
=Π Aut
G ×Aut(G) J
Let M be a continuous Zl[J]-module [i.e., a topological module equipped with
continuous actions by Zl, J], where l ∈ Σ.
(i) We shall refer to a [continuous] character ψ : J → Z×
l as quasi-cyclotomic
(respectively, Q-cyclotomic)i f ψ (respectively, some positive power of ψ)c o i n c i d e s
with the restriction to J of the character χl (respectively, some integer power of
the character χl) of Lemma 2.1 on some open subgroupJ′ ⊆ J of J.I f ψ : J → Z×
l
is a [continuous] character, then we shall denote by
M(ψ)
the ψ-twist of M. That is to say, the underlying topological Zl-modules of M,
M(ψ) are identical; if the action of γ ∈ J on M maps m ∈ M to γ · m ∈ M,t h e n
the action of γ ∈ J on M(ψ) maps m ↦→ ψ(γ) · (γ · m) ∈ M = M(ψ). If n ∈ Z,
then we shall write M(n)
def
= M((χl|J)n), where χl|J denotes the restriction of the
cyclotomic character χl of Lemma 2.1 to J. We shall say that M is quasi-trivial if
some open subgroup J′ ⊆ J acts trivially on M. We shall say that M is quasi-toral
if M(−1) is quasi-trivial. If, for some open subgroup J′ ⊆ J, there exists a ﬁnite
ﬁltration of Zl[J ′]-submodules
Mn ⊆ Mn−1 ⊆ ... ⊆ Mj ⊆ ... ⊆ M1 ⊆ M0 = M
such that each Mj/Mj+1 is torsion-free and, moreover, either is quasi-trivial [over
J′]o rh a sno quasi-trivial J′′-subquotients for any open subgroup J′′ ⊆ J′,t h e nw e
shall refer to the [possibly inﬁnite] sum
∑
M j /Mj+1 quasi-trivial
dimQl (Mj/Mj+1 ⊗ Ql)
[which is easily veriﬁed to be independent of the choice of a subgroup J′ ⊆ J and
aﬁ l t r a t i o n{Mj } satisfying the above properties] as the quasi-trivial rank of M.
(ii) We shall say that [the action of] J is l-cyclotomically full if the image of
the homomorphism χl|J : J → Z×
l is open. Suppose that J is l-cyclotomically
full. Then it makes sense to speak of the weight w of a Q-cyclotomic character
ψ : J → Z×
l : i.e., w is the unique rational number that may be written in the form
2a/b,w h e r ea, b are integers such that b ̸=0 , ψb =( χl|J)a.I f w> 0 (respectively,
w =0 ; w< 0), then we shall say that ψ is positive (respectively, null; negative).
If w ∈ Q,a n dψ : J → Z×
l is a Q-cyclotomic character of weight w, then we shall
refer to the quasi-trivial rank ofM(ψ−1)a st h el-weight w rank of M. [One veriﬁes
immediately that the l-weight w rank is independent of the choice of ψ.] If the
l-weight w rank of M is nonzero, then we shall say thatw is an associated l-weight
of M.W r i t e
w
l(M) ⊆ Q

A COMBINA TORIAL VERSION OF THE GROTHENDIECK CONJECTURE 19
for the set of associated l-weights of M.
(iii) Suppose that J is l-cyclotomically full. Observe that if Π G′ ⊆ ΠG is any
characteristic open subgroup, then ΠJ
G acts naturally on ΠG′ , hence also onMG′ ⊗Zl.
Set
w
l(J)
def
=
⋃
G′
w
l(MG′ ⊗ Zl)
[where the union ranges over characteristic open subgroups Π G′ ⊆ ΠG]. We shall
refer to w
l(J)a st h eset of associated l-weights of [the action of] J.I f e v e r yw ∈
w
l(J)s a t i s ﬁ e s0≤ w ≤ 2, then we shall say that [the action of] J is weakly l-
graphically full. If, for every characteristic open subgroup Π G′ ⊆ ΠG, it holds that
w
l((Mvert
G′ /Medge
G′ ) ⊗ Zl) ⊆ (0, 2)Q
def
= {w ∈ Q | 0 <w< 2}
then we shall say that [the action of] J is l-graphically full.[ T h u s ,“Jl -graphically
full” implies “J weakly l-graphically full” — cf. Proposition 2.4, (i), (ii), below.]
Remark 2.3.1. The purpose of the introduction of the notion “l-cyclotomically
full” is to allow us to describe, in compact form, that situation in which it makes
sense to speak of “weights” in a fashion similar to the case where the action of
J arises from scheme theory. Once it makes sense to speak of “weights”, one
may introduce the notion of “l-graphically full”(respectively, “weakly l-graphically
full”), which asserts, in essence, that the weights behave as one would expect in the
case of precisely one (respectively, at least one, i.e., possibly two nested,a si nt h e
situations of Corollaries 2.8, 2.10 below)degeneration(s) of the hypothetical family
of hyperbolic curves under consideration.
Proposition 2.4. (Quasi-triviality and Quasi-torality) Let J be as in
Deﬁnition 2.3; l ∈ Σ. Write m
(G) for the rank [over ˆZΣ] of the ﬁnitely generated,
free ˆZΣ-module MG. Then the following hold.
(i) (MG/Mvert
G ) ⊗ Zl is quasi-trivial.
(ii) Mcusp
G ⊗ Zl, Medge
G ⊗ Zl are quasi-toral. In particular, ifJ is l-cyclotomi-
cally full ,a n d2 ̸∈ w
l(J), then the submodule Medge
G ⊗ Zl ⊆ MG ⊗ Zl is zero.
(iii) Assume that G is sturdy. Then there exists a positive integerm ≤ 2m
(G)
such that det(MG ⊗ Zl)⊗2(−m) is quasi-trivial.
(iv) Assume that G is sturdy. Then a character ψ : J → Z×
l is Q-cyclotomic
if and only if it admits a positive power that coincides with the aψ -th power of
the character obtained by the natural action of J on det(MG ⊗ Zl)⊗2,f o rs o m e
aψ ∈ Z. Suppose further that J is l-cyclotomically full .T h e n aQ-cyclotomic
ψ is positive (respectively, null; negative)i fa n do n l yi faψ may be taken to
be positive (respectively, zero; negative). Finally, any two Q-cyclotomic characters
J → Z×
l of the same weight necessarily coincide on some open subgroupJ′ ⊆ J.

20 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(v) Assume that the image of J in Aut(G) is open.T h e nJ is l-graphically
full.
(vi) Assume that J is l-cyclotomically full .T h e n2 ̸= w ∈ w
l(J) implies
2 − w ∈ w
l(J). If, moreover, G is noncuspidal,t h e nw ∈ w
l(J) implies 2 − w ∈
w
l(J).
(vii) Assume that J is l-cyclotomically full, and that G has cusps [i.e., that
ΠG is free — cf. Remark 1.1.3]. Then for every suﬃciently small open subgroup
ΠG′ ⊆ ΠG, the subset
{0}
⋃
w
l(MG′ ⊗ Zl) ⊆ Q
is invariant with respect to the automorphism λ ↦→ 2 − λ of Q; in particular, the
sum of the maximum and minimum elements of this [ﬁnite] subset is equal to
2.
(viii) Assume that J is l-graphically full .T h e nMedge
G ⊗ Zl ⊆ MG ⊗ Zl is
the maximal quasi-toral Zl[J]-submodule of MG ⊗ Zl.
(ix) Assume that J is l-graphically full.T h e nMG ⊗ Zl ↠ (MG/Mvert
G ) ⊗ Zl
is the maximal torsion-free quasi-trivial Zl[J]-quotient module of MG ⊗ Zl.
Proof. Assertion (i) follows immediately from Remarks 1.1.3, 1.1.4. Now whenG is
noncuspidal, assertion (ii) follows from assertion (i); Proposition 1.3. For arbitrary
G, assertion (ii) follows from assertion (ii) in the noncuspidal case, together with
Proposition 2.2, (iv). Assertion (iii) follows immediately from assertion (ii) [applied
to Mcusp
G ⊗Zl]; Proposition 1.3 [applied to (MG/Mcusp
G )⊗Zl, which is possible in light
of the sturdiness assumption — cf. Remark 1.1.6]. Assertion (iv) follows formally
from assertion (iii); the deﬁnitions; the fact that Z×
l contains a torsion-free open
subgroup.
To verify assertion (v), it suﬃces to consider the case where G arises from a
pointed stable curve over a ﬁnite ﬁeld k [cf. the proof of Proposition 1.3], and J
is equal to an open subgroup of Aut( G). Then assertion (v) follows from the fact
that [in the notation and terminology ofloc. cit.] the action of Gk on Mvert
G /Medge
G
is of weight 1. Assertion (vi) follows from assertion (ii); Proposition 1.3, applied to
the compactiﬁcation [cf. Remark 1.1.6] of a sturdy ﬁnite ´etale ΠG-covering of G.
Next, we consider assertion (vii). Suppose that ΠG′ ⊆ ΠG is an open subgroup
such that r
(G′) ≥ 2. Thus, Mcusp
G′ ̸= 0 [cf. Remark 1.3.1], so [by assertion (ii)]
0, 2 ∈ EG′
def
= {0} ⋃w
l(MG′ ⊗ Zl). Thus, if we set E′
G′
def
= w
l(Mvert
G′ /Medge
G′ ⊗ Zl),
then [by assertions, (i), (ii)], it follows that EG′ = {0, 2} ⋃E′
G′ .M o r e o v e r , b y
Proposition 1.3 [applied to the compactiﬁcation [cf. Remark 1.1.6] of G], E′
G′ is
invariant with respect to the automorphism λ ↦→ 2 − λ of Q. But this implies the
desired invariance of EG′ with respect to this automorphism of Q. This completes
the proof of assertion (vii). Finally, assertions (viii), (ix) follow immediately from
assertions (i), (ii); the deﬁnitions. □

A COMBINA TORIAL VERSION OF THE GROTHENDIECK CONJECTURE 21
Example 2.5. Stable Log Curves over a Logarithmic Point. Let Slog
be a log scheme, with underlying scheme S
def
=S p e c (k), where k is a ﬁeld ,a n dl o g
structure given by a chart N ∋ 1 ↦→ 0 ∈ k [cf. the theory of [Kato]]. Let
Xlog → Slog
be a stable log curve over Slog [cf. §0]. Let Tlog → Slog be a “separable closure”
of Slog, i.e., the underlying scheme T of Tlog is of the form T =S p e c (
k), where
 k
is a separable closure of k; the log structure of Tlog is given by a chart M ∋ 1 ↦→
0 ∈ k,w h e r eM ⊆ Q is the monoid of positive rational numbers with denominators
invertible in k; the morphism Tlog → Slog arises from the natural maps k↪ →
 k,
N ↪→ M. Thus, if we write Gklog
def
=A u t (Tlog/Slog), then we have a natural exact
sequence
1 → Iklog → Gklog → Gk → 1
where Gk
def
= Gal(
 k/k); Iklog
def
= Hom( Q/Z,
 k
×
). Now the admissible coverings of
Xlog [with tame ramiﬁcation at the cusps] determine an admissible fundamental
group ΠXlog which ﬁts into a natural exact sequence:
1 → Δ Xlog → ΠXlog → Gklog → 1
[The theory of admissible coverings is discussed in detail in [Mzk1], §3; [Mzk2], §2;
[Mzk4], §2; [Mzk4], Appendix. It follows, in particular, from this theory that, if
one chooses a lifting of Xlog → Slog to some generically smooth stable log curve
Xlog
lift → Slog
lift
—w h e r eSlift is the spectrum of a complete discrete valuation ring with residue
ﬁeld k; the log structure on Slog
lift is the log structure determined by the monoid
of generically invertible functions — then the coverings arising from Π Xlog may
be realized as coverings of the generically smooth curve Xlog
lift that satisfy certain
properties.] Moreover, if Σ is a set of primes that does not contain the residue
characteristic of k, and we denote by G the semi-graph of anabelioids of pro- Σ
PSC-type arising from the pointed stable curve over
 k determined by Xlog,t h e n
the maximal pro-Σ quotient of Δ Xlog may be naturally identiﬁed with the PSC-
fundamental group ΠG. In particular, one obtains a natural outer action of Gklog
on Π G, the automorphisms of which are easily seen [by the functoriality of the
various fundamental groups involved!] to be graphic. That is to say, we obtain
continuous homomorphisms as follows:
Gklog → Aut(G) ∼= Outgrph(ΠG) ⊆ Out(ΠG)
Now suppose that H ⊆ Gklog is a closed subgroup such that the restriction to H of
the homomorphism Gklog → Aut(G) factors through some quotient H ↠ J:
H ↠ J → Aut(G)
For l ∈ Σ, we shall refer to the image in J of the intersection of H with the pro-l
component of Iklog as the l-inertia subgroup of J; we shall say that [the action

22 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
on G of] J is l-logarithmically full if the l-inertia subgroup of J is inﬁnite [hence
isomorphic to Zl(1)]. If H is an open subgroup Gklog , then we shall say that [the
action on G of] J is arithmetically full and refer to k as the base ﬁeld.
Remark 2.5.1. Note that from the point of view of Example 2.5, one may think
of the action of Gk on G appearing in the proof of Proposition 1.3 as the restriction
of the action ofGklog on G discussed in Example 2.5 to some section ofGklog ↠ Gk.
Proposition 2.6. (The Logarithmic Inertia Action) In the notation of
Example 2.5, Iklog acts quasi-unipotently [i.e., an open subgroup of Iklog acts
unipotently] on MG ⊗ Zl, and, moreover, the submodule
Mvert
G ⊗ Zl ⊆ MG ⊗ Zl
is the maximal quasi-trivial Zl[Iklog ]-submodule of MG ⊗ Zl [i.e., the maximal
submodule on which some open subgroup ofIklog acts trivially].
Proof. Let us ﬁrst observe that if G is noncuspidal, then the asserted quasi-
unipotency (respectively, quasi-triviality) of the action of Iklog on MG ⊗ Zl (re-
spectively, Mvert
G ⊗ Zl) follows immediately from the well-known theory of Galois
actions on torsion points of degenerating abelian varieties [cf., e.g., [FC], Chapter
III, Corollary 7.3; here, we note that, in the terminology ofloc. cit., the submodule
Mvert
G ⊗ Zl corresponds to the submodule determined by the“Raynaud extension”].
Thus, one obtains the asserted quasi-unipotency/quasi-triviality in the case of not
necessarily noncuspidal G by applying the theory of the “double” [cf. Proposition
2.2, (iv)]. Now it remains to prove the asserted maximality. But this follows again
from [FC], Chapter III, Corollary 7.3 [i.e., the fact that the period matrix of a
degenerating abelian variety is always nondegenerate]. □
Now, by combining Theorem 1.6 with the theory of the present §2 [cf., in
particular, Proposition 2.4], we obtain the following result.
Corollary 2.7. (Graphicity) Let G, H be semi-graphs of anabelioids of
pro-Σ PSC-type; JG → Aut(G), JH → Aut(H) continuous homomorphisms.
Suppose, moreover, that we have been given isomorphisms of proﬁnite groups
α :Π G
∼
→ ΠH; ι: JG
∼
→ JH
which are compatible, with respect to the respective outer actions of JG, JH on
ΠG, ΠH.T h e n ,f o rl ∈ Σ:
(i) Suppose that the respective actions ofJG, JH on G, H are l-cyclotomically
full.T h e nα is group-theoretically cuspidal .
(ii) Suppose that the respective actions of JG, JH on G, H are l-graphically
full [cf., e.g., Proposition 2.4, (v)]. Then α is graphic.

A COMBINA TORIAL VERSION OF THE GROTHENDIECK CONJECTURE 23
(iii) Suppose that the respective actions of JG, JH on G, H arise from data
as in Example 2.5; that G, H are noncuspidal; and that, in the terminology of
Example 2.5, these actions are l-logarithmically full, and, moreover, ιmaps the
l-inertia subgroup of JG isomorphically onto that of JH.T h e nα is graphic.
(iv) Outgrph(ΠG) is commensurably terminal in Out(ΠG).
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). By Theorem 1.6, (i), it suﬃces to prove that
α is numerically cuspidal, under the further assumption that G, H have cusps [i.e.,
that ΠG,Π H are free— cf. Remark 1.1.3]. By passing to sturdy ﬁnite ´etale coverings
of G, H that correspond via α [cf. Remark 1.1.5], it follows from Proposition 2.4,
(iv), that ιpreserves positive and null Q-cyclotomic characters to Z×
l . Thus, by
Proposition 2.4, (vii), it follows that ιpreserves the Q-cyclotomic characters to Z×
l
of weight 2. Now, by applying Proposition 1.3 to thecompactiﬁcations [cf. Remark
1.1.6] of sturdy ﬁnite ´etale coverings G′ →G , H′ →H that correspond via α [cf.
Remark 1.1.5], we conclude that the rank of Mcusp
G′ (respectively, Mcusp
H′ )m a yb e
computed as the diﬀerence between the l-weight 2 and l-weight 0 ranks of MG′
(respectively, MH′ ) [cf. Proposition 2.4, (ii); Remark 1.3.1]; moreover, [cf. Remark
1.3.1] this data allows one to compute r
(G′) (respectively, r
(H′)). This completes
the proof of assertion (i).
Next, we consider assertion (ii). By assertion (i), it follows that α is group-
theoretically cuspidal. Thus, by replacing G, H by thecompactiﬁcations [cf. Remark
1.1.6] of sturdy ﬁnite ´etale coverings of G, H that correspond via α [cf. Remark
1.1.5], we may assume without loss of generality that G, H are noncuspidal.T h u s ,
by Theorem 1.6, (ii); Remark 1.4.1, it suﬃces to prove thatα is verticially ﬁltration-
preserving. But this follows from Proposition 2.4, (ix). This completes the proof of
assertion (ii). Assertion (iv) follows formally from assertion (ii) [by taking H
def
= G;
JG, JH to be open subgroups of Outgrph(ΠG) — cf. Proposition 2.4, (v)].
Finally, we consider assertion (iii). By Theorem 1.6, (ii); Remark 1.4.1, it
suﬃces to prove that α is verticially ﬁltration-preserving . But this follows from
Proposition 2.6 and the assumptions concerning thel-inertia subgroups. This com-
pletes the proof of assertion (iii). □
Remark 2.7.1. Corollary 2.7, (iv), may be regarded as a sort of anabelian
analogue of the well-known linear algebra fact that, if k is an algebraically closed
ﬁeld, then parabolic subgroupsof the general linear group GLn(k), where n ≥ 2—
e.g., the subgroups that preserve some ﬁltration of a k-vector space of dimension n
—a r e normally terminal in GLn(k) [cf., e.g., [Hum], p. 179].
Remark 2.7.2. Note that the group-theoretic cuspidalityof [Mzk4], Lemma 1.3.9
(respectively, the graphicity of [Mzk4], Lemma 2.3) may be regarded as a [rather
weak] special case of Corollary 2.7, (i) (respectively, Corollary 2.7, (ii)) — cf. the
proof of Proposition 2.4, (v), above.
Corollary 2.8. (Graphicity over an Arithmetic Logarithmic Point) Let
G, H be semi-graphs of anabelioids of pro- Σ PSC-type; JG → Aut(G), JH →

24 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Aut(H) continuous homomorphisms that arise from data as in Example 2.5 such
that [in the terminology of Example 2.5] the resulting actions arel-logarithmically
full,f o rs o m el ∈ Σ,a n d arithmetically full ,w i t hbase ﬁeld isomorphic to
a subﬁeld of a ﬁnitely generated extension of Fp or Qp, for some prime p ̸∈ Σ
[where we allow p to diﬀer for G, H]. Suppose, moreover, that we have been given
isomorphisms of proﬁnite groups
α :Π G
∼
→ ΠH; ι: JG
∼
→ JH
which are compatible, with respect to the respective outer actions of JG, JH on
ΠG, ΠH, and satisfy the property that ιmaps the l-inertia subgroup of JG iso-
morphically onto that of JH. Then the respective actions of JG, JH on G, H are
weakly l-graphically full ,a n dα is graphic.
Proof. Indeed, by using the Frobenius elements of the Galois group of a ﬁnitely
generated extension of Fp or Qp containing the base ﬁeld in question [cf. the proof
of Proposition 2.4, (v)], one obtains thatJG, JH are weakly l-graphically full. [Note
that, unlike the situation in the proof of Proposition 2.4, (v), the pointed stable
curve over a ﬁnite ﬁeld that one uses here to conclude weak l-graphic fullness will,
in general, be a degeneration of the original pointed stable curve over the base
ﬁeld appearing in Example 2.5. This is the reason why [unlike the situation in
the proof of Proposition 2.4, (v)] in the present context, one may only conclude
weak l-graphic fullness.] By Corollary 2.7, (i), we thus conclude that α is group-
theoretically cuspidal. Moreover, this allows us [by passing to compactiﬁcations of
sturdy ﬁnite ´etale coverings] to reduce to the noncuspidal case, hence to conclude
that α is graphic by Corollary 2.7, (iii). □
Remark 2.8.1. In the situation of Corollary 2.8, suppose further that the base
ﬁeld in question is sub-p-adic [i.e., isomorphic to a subﬁeld of a ﬁnitely generated
extension of Qp], and that ιlies over an isomorphism between the absolute Galois
groups of the respective base ﬁelds that arises from an isomorphism between the
respective base ﬁelds. Then one may apply the main result of [Mzk3] — just as the
main result of [Tama1] was applied in [Mzk2],§7 — to the variousverticial subgroups
to obtain a version of the Grothendieck conjecture for pointed stable curves over a
sub-p-adic ﬁeld. Note that in this situation, when Σ is theset of all primes,o n em a y
also reconstruct the log structures at the nodes by considering the decomposition
groups at the nodes [cf. the theory of [Mzk2], §6]. We leave the routine details to
the interested reader.
Remark 2.8.2. In the situation of Corollary 2.8, suppose further that the base
ﬁeld in question is a ﬁnite extension of Qp [which may diﬀer for G, H], and that
Σi st h eset of all primes. Then observe that it follows from [Mzk4], Lemma 1.1.4,
(ii), that ιlies over an isomorphism between the absolute Galois groups of the re-
spective base ﬁelds [that does not necessarily arise from an isomorphism between
the respective base ﬁelds!]. Now suppose further that the hyperbolic curve consti-
tuted by [the complement of the nodes and cusps in] each irreducible component

A COMBINA TORIAL VERSION OF THE GROTHENDIECK CONJECTURE 25
of the pointed stable curves over the respective base ﬁelds that give rise to the
data in question is isogenous [cf. §0] to a hyperbolic curve of genus zero .T h e n
it follows from the theory of [Mzk6], §4 — more precisely, the “rigidity” of the
cuspidal edge-like subgroups implied by [Mzk6], Theorem 4.3, together with the
integral absoluteness of [Mzk6], Corollary 4.11 — that one may reconstruct the log
structures at the nodes by considering the decomposition groups at the nodes [cf.
the theory of [Mzk2], §6]. We leave the routine details to the interested reader.
Corollary 2.9. (Unramiﬁed Graphicity) Let G, H be sturdy semi-graphs
of anabelioids of pro- Σ PSC-type; JG → Aut(G), JH → Aut(H) continu-
ous homomorphisms which determine l-graphically full actions, for some l ∈ Σ.
Suppose, moreover, that we have been given factorizations
JG ↠ J′
G → Out(Πunr
G ); JH ↠ J′
H → Out(Πunr
H )
[where the composite homomorphisms are the natural homomorphisms; the ﬁrst ar-
row of each factorization is a surjection], together withisomorphisms of proﬁnite
groups
β :Π unr
G
∼
→ Πunr
H ; ι′ : J′
G
∼
→ J′
H
which are compatible, with respect to the respective outer actions of J′
G, J′
H on
Πunr
G , Πunr
H .T h e nβ is group-theoretically verticial.
Proof. By Theorem 1.6, (iii), it suﬃces to prove that α is verticially ﬁltration-
preserving. But this follows from Proposition 2.4, (ix). □
Remark 2.9.1. Note that the group-theoretic verticiality of [Mzk2], Proposition
1.4 may be regarded as a [rather weak]special caseof Corollary 2.9 — cf. the proof
of Proposition 2.4, (v), above.
Finally, we observe the following consequence of the theory of the present paper
concerning anabelian geometry over ﬁnite extensions of the quotient ﬁeld of the ring
of Witt vectors of an algebraic closure of a ﬁnite ﬁeld.
Corollary 2.10. (Inertia Action in the Case of Two Primes) For i =1 , 2,
let K
i be a ﬁnite extension of the quotient ﬁeld of the ring of Witt vectors W(
Fpi )
with coeﬃcients in an algebraic closure
Fpi of the ﬁnite ﬁeld of cardinality pi,w h e r e
pi is a prime number;
 Ki an algebraic closure of Ki; Gi
def
= Gal(
Ki/Ki); Xi a hy-
perbolic curve over Ki whose corresponding stable log curve extends to a stable
log curve Xlog
i over the spectrum of the ring of integers OKi of Ki [equipped with
the log structure determined by the closed point of Spec(OKi )]; Σ a set of prime
numbers such that pi ∈ Σ; Δ i the maximal pro- Σ quotient of the ´etale funda-
mental group of (Xi) ×Ki
 Ki [so Δ i may be regarded as the proﬁnite fundamental

26 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
group of a semi-graph of anabelioidsGi of pro-Σ PSC-type with precisely one vertex
and no closed edges];
αG : G1
∼
→ G2; αΔ :Δ 1
∼
→ Δ2
ap a i ro fisomorphisms of proﬁnite groups that are compatible with the nat-
ural outer action of Gi on Δ i. Then the following hold.
(i) We have p1 = p2 [so we shall write p
def
= p1 = p2]; for i =1 , 2, the action of
Gi on Gi is weakly p-graphically full ; αΔ is group-theoretically cuspidal .
(ii) Suppose that the cardinality of Σ is ≥ 2.T h e nαΔ induces a functorial
[i.e., with respect to the pair (αG,αΔ )] isomorphism of the “dual semi-graphs
with compact structure” [cf. [Mzk4], Appendix] of the special ﬁbers of theXlog
i .
(iii) Suppose that the cardinality of Σ is ≥ 2. Write πtemp
1 ((Xi) ×Ki
 Ki)
for the tempered fundamental group of [Andr´e], §4 [cf. also [Mzk7], Examples
3.10, 5.6];
Δtemp
i
def
= lim←−N
πtemp
1 ((Xi) ×Ki
 Ki)/N
for the “Σ-tempered fundamental group” — i.e., the inverse limit where N
varies over the open normal subgroups ofπtemp
1 ((Xi) ×Ki
 Ki) such that the quotient
πtemp
1 ((Xi) ×Ki
 Ki)/N is an extension of a ﬁnite group whose order is a product
of primes ∈ Σ by a discrete free group . [Here, we recall that such a discrete
free group corresponds to a “combinatorial covering” determined by the graph of the
special ﬁber of some stable reduction of a covering ofXi — cf. [Andr´e], Proposition
4.3.1; [Andr´e], the proof of Lemma 6.1.1.] Thus, we have a natural continuous outer
action of Gi on Δtemp
i ; Δ i is the pro-Σ completion of Δtemp
i . Then the operation
of pro-Σ completion determines a surjection from the set of compatible pairs
of isomorphisms of topological groups
βG : G1
∼
→ G2; βΔ temp :Δ temp
1
∼
→ Δtemp
2
considered up to inner automorphisms of theΔtemp
i to the set of compatible pairs
of isomorphisms of topological groups
γG : G1
∼
→ G2; γΔ :Δ 1
∼
→ Δ2
considered up to inner automorphisms of the Δ i.
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). Since [as is well-known] Gi is an extension
of an abelian proﬁnite group by a nonabelian pro-pi group, it follows that pi may
be characterized as the unique prime numberp′ such that Gi contains a nonabelian
pro-p′ closed subgroup. Thus, the existence of αG implies that p1 = p2;w r i t e
p
def
= p1 = p2. Now since the tensor product with Qp of the abelianization of
any open subgroup of Δ i admits a ﬁltration [cf., e.g., [FC], Chapter III, Corollary
7.3] each of whose subquotients is Hodge-Tate [relative to the action of some open

A COMBINA TORIAL VERSION OF THE GROTHENDIECK CONJECTURE 27
subgroup of Gi], with Hodge-Tate decomposition only involving “Tate twists” by
the zero-th or ﬁrst power of the cyclotomic character [cf. [Tate], §4, Corollary 2],
it follows that Gi is [relative to its outer action on Δ i] weakly p-graphically full.
Thus, the remainder of assertion (i) follows from Corollary 2.7, (i).
Next, we consider assertion (ii). Letl ∈ Σb e distinct from p
def
= p1 = p2.W r i t e
Δ i ↠ Δ(l)
i for the maximal pro-l quotient of Δ i. Since the subgroup of Out(Δ (l)
i )
that induces the identity on the tensor product withFl of the abelianization of Δ(l)
i
is [easily seen to be] a pro-l group, it follows that by replacing Gi by an open sub-
group of Gi, we may assume that the natural mapGi → Out(Δ(l)
i ) factors through
the maximal pro-l quotient Gi ↠ G(l)
i of Gi. Thus, the data given by the outer
action of G(l)
i on Δ(l)
i is l-logarithmically full data of the type considered in Exam-
ple 2.5. In particular, in the noncuspidal case, assertion (ii) follows immediately
from Corollary 2.7, (iii). On the other hand, even if we are not in the noncuspidal
case, by passing to compactiﬁcations of sturdy ﬁnite ´etale coverings of the Xi and
applying the fact that a cuspidal edge-like subgroup belongs to a unique verticial
subgroup [cf. Proposition 1.5, (i)], we reduce immediately [via assertion (i)] to the
noncuspidal case. This completes the proof of assertion (ii).
Finally, we observe that assertion (iii) follows formally from assertion (ii) via
the same argument applied [in the case where Σ is the set of all primes, and the
base ﬁelds are ﬁnite extensions of Qp] in the proof of [Mzk7], Theorem 6.6, to derive
the “surjectivity portion” of [Mzk7], Theorem 6.6, from [Mzk4], Lemma 2.3. □
Remark 2.10.1. Since free discrete groups inject into their pro-Σ completions
[cf. [RZ], Proposition 3.3.15], the natural map Δ temp
i → Δ i is injective [cf. the
proof of [Mzk7], Corollary 3.11]. On the other hand, unlike the situation of [Mzk7],
Theorem 6.6, we are unable to conclude that the surjection of Corollary 2.10, (iii),
is a bijection since [unlike the proﬁnite case — cf. [Andr´e], Corollary 6.2.2] it is not
clear that the [image in Δi of] Δ temp
i is equal to its own normalizer in Δi.

28 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Bibliography
[Andr´e] Y. Andr´e, On a geometric description of Gal(
 Qp/Qp)a n da p-adic avatar of
ˆGT, Duke Math. J. 119 (2003), 1–39.
[Asada] M. Asada, The compatibility of the ﬁltration of mapping class groups of two
surfaces pasted along the boundaries,Topology and its Applications108 (2000)
217–232.
[DM] P. Deligne and D. Mumford, The irreducibility of the moduli space of curves
of given genus, IHES Publ. Math. 36 (1969), 75–109.
[FC] G. Faltings and C.-L. Chai,Degenerations of abelian varieties, Springer-Verlag
(1990).
[FK] E. Freitag and R. Kiehl, ´Etale cohomology and the Weil conjecture, Springer
Verlag (1988).
[Hum] J. E. Humphreys, Linear algebraic groups, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 21,
Springer-Verlag (1975).
[Kato] K. Kato, Logarithmic structures of Fontaine-Illusie, Proceedings of the First
JAMI Conference, Johns Hopkins Univ. Press (1990), 191–224.
[Knud] F. F. Knudsen, The projectivity of the moduli space of stable curves, II,Math.
Scand. 52 (1983), 161–199.
[Mzk1] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of the compactiﬁcation of the Hurwitz scheme,
Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci. 31 (1995), 355–441.
[Mzk2] S. Mochizuki, The proﬁnite Grothendieck conjecture for closed hyperbolic
curves over number ﬁelds, J. Math. Sci., Univ. Tokyo 3 (1996), 571–627.
[Mzk3] S. Mochizuki, The local pro-p anabelian geometry of curves,Invent. Math. 138
(1999), 319–423.
[Mzk4] S. Mochizuki, The absolute anabelian geometry of hyperbolic curves, Galois
theory and modular forms, Kluwer Academic Publishers (2003), 77–122.
[Mzk5] S. Mochizuki, The geometry of anabelioids, Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci. 40
(2004), 819–881.
[Mzk6] S. Mochizuki, Galois sections in absolute anabelian geometry, Nagoya Math.
J. 179 (2005), 17–45.
[Mzk7] S. Mochizuki, Semi-graphs of anabelioids,Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci.42 (2006),
221–322.
[Mumf] D. Mumford, Abelian varieties, Oxford Univ. Press (1974).
[Naka1] H. Nakamura, Galois rigidity of the ´ etale fundamental groups of punctured
projective lines, J. reine angew. Math. 411 (1990), 205–216.
[Naka2] H. Nakamura, Galois rigidity of pure sphere braid groups and proﬁnite calculus,
J. Math. Sci. Univ. Tokyo 1 (1994), 71–136.

A COMBINA TORIAL VERSION OF THE GROTHENDIECK CONJECTURE 29
[RZ] Ribes and Zaleskii, Proﬁnite groups , Ergeb. Math. Grenzgeb. 3, Springer-
Verlag (2000).
[Tama1] A. Tamagawa, The Grothendieck conjecture for aﬃne curves,Compositio Math.
109 (1997), 135–194.
[Tama2] A. Tamagawa, On the fundamental groups of curves over algebraically closed
Fields of characteristic > 0, Internat. Math. Res. Notices 16 (1999), 853–873.
[Tate] J. Tate,p-divisible groups, Proceedings of a Conference on Local Fields , Drieber-
gen, Springer-Verlag (1967), 158–183.
Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences
Kyoto University
Kyoto 606-8502
Japan
motizuki@kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp