COMMENTS ON “COMBINA TORIAL ANABELIAN TOPICS I”
Shinichi Mochizuki
January 2024
(1.) In Deﬁnition 2.6, (i), “Aut |grph|(G)” should be deﬁned as the subgroup of
Aut(G) of automorphisms of G which induce the identity automorphism on the
underlying semi-graph ofG [cf. the deﬁnition given in Theorem B]. In a similar vein,
in Deﬁnition 2.6, (iii), “Aut|H|(G)” should be deﬁned as the subgroup of Aut(G)o f
automorphisms ofG which preserve the sub-semi-graphH of the underlying semi-
graph ofG and, moreover, induce the identity automorphism ofH. Since the correct
deﬁnitions are applied throughout the exposition of the present paper, these errors
in the statement of the deﬁnitions haveno substantive eﬀecton the exposition of
the present paper, except for the following two instances [which themselves do not
have any substantive eﬀect on the exposition of the present paper]:
(i) In the display of Proposition 2.7, (ii), “Aut
|grph|(G)” should be replaced
by “Aut|VCN(G)|(G)”.
(ii) In Proposition 2.7, (iii), the phrase “In particular” should be replaced
by the word “Finally”.
(2.) In Deﬁnition 2.8, (vii), the phrase “equivalent class” should read “equivalence
class”.
(3.) In the portion of the proof of Corollary 5.9 concerning the implication “(iii-3)
=⇒ (iii-1)”, the subscript “3g −g +r” should read “3g −3+ r”.
(4.) In the proof of Lemma 1.3, the phrase “scheme-theoretic image ofsi : Bi ↪→
B ×k C” should read “scheme-theoretic image ofsi : B↪→ B ×k C”.
(5.) There is a slight [but substantively irrelevant] inaccuracy in the ﬁnal sentence
of the discussion entitled “Curves” in§0. A corrected version of this ﬁnal sentence
may be given as follows:
Then we shall refer to as then-th log conﬁguration spaceof Xlog the log scheme
obtained by pulling back the (1-)morphismM
log
g,r+n → M
log
g,r given by forgetting
the last n points via the classifying (1-)morphismT log → M
log
g,r of Xlog ×S T for
some ﬁnite ´etale covering T → S [i.e., over which thedivisor of cusps splits]o f
Typeset by AMS-TEX
1

2 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
the underlying schemeS of Slog and then descending [in the evident fashion] from
T log def
= T ×S Slog to Slog.
(6.) In the statement of Theorem C and Corollary 5.10, there are references to
[CmbGC], Example 2.5, concerning the deﬁnition of a certainsemi-graph of an-
abelioids of pro-ΣPSC-type determined by a stable log curve over a base [fs] log
scheme whose underlying scheme is the spectrum of a ﬁeld. At ﬁrst glance, this may
appear to be problematic since the “stable log curve over a base log scheme whose
underlying scheme is the spectrum of a ﬁeld” that appears in [CmbGC], Example
2.5, is subject to the condition that the log structure of this base log scheme be of
a certainrestricted type. In fact, this is not a problem, however, since the construc-
tion of thesemi-graph of anabelioids of pro-ΣPSC-type in [CmbGC], Example 2.5,
depends only on thepointed stable curveover a ﬁeld determined by the given log
stable curve [i.e., isindependent of the log structure on the base log scheme].
(7.) There are some ﬂaws in the typesetting of the initial portion of the statement
of Corollary 5.10. These ﬂaws did not exist in the original text that was submitted
for publication, but apparently appeared at some stage of the typesetting carried
out by the publishing company. The [correct] original version of this portion of the
statement of Corollary 5.10 is as follows:
Corollary 5.10 (Combinatorial/group-theoretic nature of scheme-
theoreticity). Let (g,r) be a pair of nonnegative integers such that2g−2+ r> 0;
Σa nonempty set of prime numbers;R a complete discrete valuation ring whose
residue ﬁeldk is separably closed of characteristic̸∈Σ; S
log the log scheme obtained
by equipping S
def
=S p e cR with the log structure determined by the maximal ideal
of R; x ∈(Mg,r)S(k) a k-valued point of themoduli stack of curves (Mg,r)S of
type (g,r) over S [cf. the discussion entitled “Curves” in§0]; ˆO the completion of
...
(8.) At the beginning of Deﬁnitions 2.2, 2.4, 2.5, and 2.8, the phrase “at the
beginning the present” should read “at the beginning of the present”.
(9.) In the ﬁnal sentence of the proof of Lemma 1.1, “the fact that thefi’s are
isomorphisms (respectively, ” should read “the fact that the image⊆B ×k C of
each sectionsi is of degree1o v e rB (respectively, ”.
(10.) In the ﬁnal display of the proof of Corollary 3.9, the subscript “b′
i” that
appears above the upper middle horizontal arrow should read “b′
1”.
(11.) In the ﬁnal sentence of the statement of Lemma 4.3, (ii), the word “satis-
ﬁes” should be replaced by the text “, which we denote byZAut|grph| (G∞ )(πtop
1 (G)),
satisﬁes”.
(12.) In Remark 5.10.1, (i), the phrase “discussed in [HM],” should read “discussed
in [NodNon],”.