COMMENTS ON “A COMBINA TORIAL VERSION
OF THE GROTHENDIECK CONJECTURE”
Shinichi Mochizuki
May 2020
(1.) In the ﬁnal sentence of Deﬁnition 1.1, (ii), the phrase “rank≥2” should read
“rank > 2”.
(2.) In Example 2.5, the set of primes Σ should be assumed to benonempty.
(3.) In thesecond sentenceof Proposition 1.2, the phrase “a vertexvi (respectively,
an edgeei)o fΠG” should read “a vertexvi (respectively, an edgeei)o f G”.
(4.) The arguments applied in Deﬁnition 1.4, (v), (vi), and Remarks 1.4.2, 1.4.3,
and 1.4.4 to prove Theorem 1.6 are formulated in a somewhat confusing way and
should be modiﬁed as follows:
(i) First of all, we remark that throughout the paper, as well as in the following
discussion, a“Galois”ﬁnite ´etale covering is to be understood as beingconnected.
(ii) In thesecond sentenceof Deﬁnition 1.4, (v), thecuspidal and nodalcases of
t h en o t i o no fapurely totally ramiﬁedcovering are in factunnecessaryand may be
deleted. Also, the terminology introduced in Deﬁnition 1.4, (vi), concerning ﬁnite
´etale coverings thatdescend is unnecessaryand may be deleted.
(iii) The text of Remark 1.4.2 should be replaced by the following text:
Let G′ →G be a Galois ﬁnite ´etale covering of degree apositive power of
l,w h e r eG is of pro-Σ PSC-type, Σ ={l}. Then one veriﬁes immediately
that, if we assume further that the coveringG′ →G is cyclic,t h e nG′ →G
is cuspidally totally ramiﬁedif and only if the inequality
r(G′′) <l ·r(G)
—w h e r ew ew r i t eG′ →G ′′ →G for the unique [up to isomorphism]
factorization of the ﬁnite ´etale coveringG′ →G as a composite of ﬁnite
´etale coverings such thatG′′ →G is of degreel — is satisﬁed. Suppose
further thatG′ →G is a [not necessarily cyclic!] Πunr
G -covering[so n(G′)=
Typeset by AMS-TEX
1

2 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
deg(G′/G)·n(G)]. Then one veriﬁes immediately thatG′ →G is verticially
purely totally ramiﬁedif and only if the equality
i(G′)=d e g (G′/G)·(i(G)−1)+1
is satisﬁed. Also, we observe that this last inequality is equivalent to the
following equality involving the expression “i(... )−n(... )” [cf. Remark
1.1.3]:
i(G′)−n(G′)=d e g (G′/G)·(i(G)−n(G)−1)+1
(iv) The text of Remark 1.4.3 should be replaced by the following text:
Suppose thatG is of pro-Σ PSC-type, Σ ={l}. Then one veriﬁes immedi-
ately that thecuspidal edge-like subgroupsof ΠG may becharacterizedas
the maximal [cf. Proposition 1.2, (i)] closed subgroupsA ⊆ΠG isomorphic
to Zl which satisfy the followingcondition:
for every characteristic open subgroup ΠG′ ⊆ ΠG,i fw ew r i t e
G′ →G ′′ →G for the ﬁnite ´etale coverings corresponding to
ΠG′ ⊆ΠG′′
def
= A·ΠG′ ⊆ΠG, then thecyclic ﬁnite ´etale covering
G′ →G ′′ is cuspidally totally ramiﬁed.
[Indeed, thenecessity of thischaracterization is immediate from the def-
initions; thesuﬃciencyof thischaracterization follows by observing that
since the set of cusps of a ﬁnite ´etale covering ofG is always ﬁnite,t h e
above condition implies that there exists acompatible system of cuspsof
the variousG′ that arise, each of which isstabilizedby the action ofA.] On
the other hand, in order to characterize theunramiﬁed verticial subgroups
of Πunr
G , it suﬃces — by consideringstabilizers of vertices of underlying
semi-graphs of ﬁnite ´etale Πunr
G -coverings ofG —t og i v eafunctorial char-
acterization of the set of vertices of G [i.e., which may also be applied
to ﬁnite ´etale Πunr
G -coverings of G]. This may be done, for sturdy G,a s
follows. Write M unr
G for the abelianization of Πunr
G . For each vertexv of
the underlying semi-graphG of G,w r i t eM unr
G [v] ⊆M unr
G for the image of
the Πunr
G -conjugacy class of unramiﬁed verticial subgroups of Πunr
G
associ-
ated tov. Then one veriﬁes immediately, byconstructing suitable abelian
Πunr
G -coverings of G via suitablegluing operations [i.e., as in the proof of
Proposition 1.2], that the inclusions M unr
G [v] ⊆M unr
G determine a split
injection ⨁
v
M unr
G [v] ↪→ M unr
G
[wherev rangesovertheverticesof G], whoseimagewedenoteby M unr-vert
G ⊆
M unr
G . Now we considerelementary abelian quotients
φ: M unr
G ↠ Q
— i.e., whereQ is anelementary abelian group.W eidentify such quotients
whenever theirkernels coincideand order such quotients by means of the

COMMENTS ON “COMBINATORIAL GROTHENDIECK” 3
relation of“domination”[i.e., inclusion of kernels]. Then one veriﬁes im-
mediately that such a quotientφ: M unr
G ↠ Q corresponds to averticially
purely totally ramiﬁedcovering ofG if and only if there exists a vertexv
of G such thatφ(M unr
G [v]) =Q, φ(M unr
G [v′]) = 0 for all verticesv′ ̸= v of
G. In particular, one concludes immediately that
the elementary abelian quotientsφ: M unr
G ↠ Q whose restric-
tion toM unr-vert
G surjects ontoQ and has the same kernel as the
quotient
M unr-vert
G ↠ M unr
G [v] ↠ M unr
G [v]⊗Fl
— where the ﬁrst “↠” is the natural projection; the second “↠”
is given by reduction modulol — may be characterized as the
maximal quotients [i.e., relative to the relation of domination]
among those elementary abelian quotients ofM unr
G that corre-
spond toverticially purely totally ramiﬁedcoverings ofG.
Thus, since G is sturdy,t h eset of verticesof G may be characterized as
the set of [nontrivial!] quotientsM unr-vert
G ↠ M unr
G [v]⊗Fl.
(v) The text of Remark 1.4.4 should be replaced by the following text:
Suppose that G is of pro-Σ PSC-type, where Σ ={l},a n dt h a tG is
noncuspidal. Then, in the spirit of thecuspidal portion of Remark 1.4.3,
we observe the following: One veriﬁes immediately that thenodal edge-like
subgroupsof ΠG may becharacterizedas themaximal [cf. Proposition 1.2,
(i)] closed subgroupsA ⊆ΠG isomorphic to Zl which satisfy the following
condition:
for every characteristic open subgroup ΠG′ ⊆ ΠG,i fw ew r i t e
G′ →G ′′ →G for the ﬁnite ´etale coverings corresponding to
ΠG′ ⊆ΠG′′
def
= A·ΠG′ ⊆ΠG, then thecyclic ﬁnite ´etale covering
G′ →G ′′ is nodally totally ramiﬁed.
Here, we note further that [one veriﬁes immediately that] the ﬁnite ´etale
coveringG′ →G ′′ is nodally totally ramiﬁedif and only if it ismodule-wise
nodal.
(vi) The text of thesecond paragraphof the proof of Theorem 1.6 should be
replaced by the following text [which may be thought as being appended to the end
of theﬁrst paragraphof the proof of Theorem 1.6]:
Then the fact thatαis group-theoretically cuspidalfollows formally from
the characterization ofcuspidal edge-like subgroupsgiven in Remark 1.4.3
and the characterization ofcuspidally totally ramiﬁedcyclic ﬁnite ´etale
coverings given in Remark 1.4.2.
(vii) The text of theﬁnal paragraphof the proof of Theorem 1.6 should be
replaced by the following text [which may be thought of as a sort of“easy version”

4 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
of the argument given in the proof of the implication “(iii) =⇒ (i)” of [CbTpII],
Proposition 1.5]:
Finally, we consider assertion (iii).Suﬃciencyis immediate. On the other
hand, necessity follows formally from the characterization ofunramiﬁed
verticial subgroupsgiven in Remark 1.4.3 and the characterization ofver-
ticially purely totally ramiﬁedcyclic ﬁnite ´etale coverings given in Remark
1.4.2.
(5.) In Remarks 2.8.1, 2.8.2, one works “in the situation of Corollary 2.8”, despite
the fact that the assumption “p ̸∈Σ” in the statement of Corollary 2.8 isnot
satisﬁedin the situations considered in Remarks 2.8.1, 2.8.2. At ﬁrst glance, this
state of aﬀairs may strike the reader as self-contradictory. The point, however,
is that one thinks of Corollary 2.8 as being applied to the variousmaximal pro-l
quotients of open subgroups of the geometric fundamental groups that appear in
Remark 2.8.1, 2.8.2, i.e., that one takes the “Σ” of Corollary 2.8 to be{l} for a
suitable prime numberl such that the assumptions in the statement of Corollary
2.8 are indeed satisﬁed.
(6.) In the ﬁrst sentence of the fourth paragraph of the discussion entitled “Curves”
in §0, the notation “Dg,r ⊆Mg,r” should read “Dg,r ⊆Cg,r”.
Bibliography
[CbTpII] Y. Hoshi, S. Mochizuki,Topics Surrounding the Combinatorial Anabelian Ge-
ometry of Hyperbolic Curves II: Tripods and Combinatorial Cuspidalization,
RIMS Preprint 1762 (November 2012).