Dear Colleagues, 
 
I am writing on behalf of the Organizing Committee of the two workshops 
 
・“Invitation to Inter-universal Teichmüller Theory” (Notes) 
・“Inter-universal Teichmüller Theory Summit 2021” (Notes) 
 
held online at RIMS, Kyoto University, in September 2021.  These two workshops are part 
of a yearlong RIMS Project 
 
“Expanding Horizons of Inter-universal Teichmüller Theory” 
 
on topics related to Inter -universal Teichmüller Theory  (IUT).  Earlier this year, two other 
closely related anabelian workshops 
 
・“Foundations and Perspectives of Anabelian Geometry” (Notes
) 
・“Combinatorial Anabelian Geometry and Related Topics” (Notes) 
 
were also held online at RIMS. 
 
I am writing, on behalf of the Organizing Committee of the two IUT  workshops, to invite 
you to register to view the  Zoom videos from the two IUT  workshops.  Mathematicians 
who attended the online Berkeley Colloquium talk “ Classical Roots of Inter -universal 
Teichmüller Theory” in November 2020 may think of these two IUT workshops as  a sort of 
vastly expanded version of this B erkeley Colloquium talk.   Alternatively, mathematicians 
who attended the online seminar  
 
・ “Promenade in Inter-universal Teichmüller Theory”
  
 
held at RIMS, Kyoto University, and Lille University (France) during the period September 
2020 - April 2021 may think of these two IUT workshops as a sort of in-depth, concentrated 
version of the RI MS-Lille seminar.   Access to the Zoom videos from the two anabelian 
geometry workshops mentioned above is also available for those who are interested. 
 
Access to the videos will be provided to professional mathematicians (and graduate students 
in mathematics) who register by sending an e-mail to any of the members of the Organizing 
Committee stating the 
 
・name,  
・affiliation, and  
・Gmail address 
 

of the person to be registered.  Access will, at least initially, be provided until March 31, 2022 
(the end of the Japanese school year), but may be extended further  if there is sufficient 
interest. 
 
The videos may be shown to a few colleagues, but are not to be made public.  Moreover, the 
videos are to be used only for scholarly, mathematical purposes.  In particular, the videos 
are not to be used for non-mathematical purposes. 
 
Many developments have come to pass in the nine years since the preprints on IUT were 
first made public in August 2012.   The four original papers on IUT were published in the 
international mathematical journal PRIMS in March 2021.   A subsequent paper by five 
authors on explicit estimates in IUT, which gives a new proof of Fermat's Last Theorem, was 
recently accepted for publication in the Kodai Math. J.  Moreover, three mathematicians 
have begun writing a new series of  papers on a  generalized version of IUT  with 
various new applications .  In particular, IUT continues to be a field of  active 
research and exciting new developments. 
 
Unfortunately, it has come to my attention that certain  misunderstandings concerning IUT 
continue to persist in certain parts of the world.   Perhaps the most famous 
misunderstanding concerns an asserted identification of  “redundant copies ”.  This 
misunderstanding involves well -known, essentially  elementary mathematics at the 
beginning graduate level concerning the general nonsense surrounding “ gluings”.  For 
instance, if one “applies” this misunderstanding to the well -known gluing construction of 
the projective line, then one concludes that the two copies of the affine line that appear in this 
gluing are “redundant’’, hence may be identified.  This identification leads immediately to 
a contradiction, i.e., to a “proof” that the projective line cannot exist!  More details may be 
found in the Introduction to [EssLgc]
 and the references given there.  
 
 As discussed in  [EssLgc]
, §1, such misunderstandings give rise to  entirely unnecessary 
confusion and can, at times, lead to  deeply detrimental disruptions of the  operational 
normalcy of the field of mathematics (cf. [EssLgc], §1.10). 
 
On the other hand, as discussed in 
[EssLgc], §1, the potent tools of 
 
(1) pr oducing detailed, explicit, accessible, and  mathematically substantive  written 
records of the mathematical reasoning underlying various assertions  concerning IUT (cf., 
e.g., article (6.) of the subsection entitled "Responsibilities  of authors" of 
the 
EMSCOP (!); [EssLgc], §1.5) and 
 
(2) enhancing the mathematical and person- to-person interconnectivity (cf. [EssLgc]
, §1.11) 
of the worldwide mathematical community by fostering  constructive 
mathematical dialogue (e.g., via e- mail and video meetings)  among mathematicians 
worldwide concerning issues of mutual interest  

 
can play an important role in overcoming unnecessary and 
unconstructive misunderstandings. 
 
It is the sincere hope of the Organizing Committee that the workshop videos discussed above 
can serve as a  dynamic stimulus  in promoting activities  around the world of the sort 
described above in (1) and (2) concerning IUT. 
 
 
 
 
                     Sincerely, 
 
 
                     Shinichi Mochizuki ( motizuki@kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp
 ) 
                      
 
                     On behalf of the Organizing Committee: 
 
                     Benjamin Collas ( bcollas@kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp
 ) 
                     Ivan Fesenko ( ivan.b.fesenko@gmail.com ) 
                     Yuichiro Hoshi ( yuichiro@kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp ) 
                     Shinichi Mochizuki ( motizuki@kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp ) 
                     Yuichiro Taguchi ( taguchi@math.titech.ac.jp ) 
 
 