Title:  Inter -universal Teichmüller Theory as an Anabelian Gateway to Diophantine Geometry and Analytic Number 
Theory (MFO-RIMS23 Version) 
 
Speaker:  Shinichi Mochizuki (RIMS, Kyoto University)  
 
Abstract: 
One question that is frequently asked concerning inter-universal Teichmüller theory (IUT) is the following: 
 
Why/how does IUT allow one to apply anabelian geometry to prove diophantine results? 
 
In this talk, we address this question from various points of view.  First, we discuss the fundamental framework 
underlying the relationship established by IUT between anabelian geometry, on the one hand, and diophantine 
geometry/analytic number theory, on the other.  This discussion centers around the N -th power map on a subring of a 
field and the difference between regarding a group as a Galois group, on the one hand, and as an abstract group that is 
not equipped with an embedding into the automorphism group of a field, on the other .  Here, we emphasize that this 
discussion is entirely elementary and only assumes a knowledge of groups/monoids, rings, fields , and the elementary 
geometry surrounding the projective line/Riemann sphere.  We also briefly discuss certain (again entirely elementary!) 
set-theoretic/foundational subtleties surrounding the notion of a “gluing”.  Such subtleties include the importance of 
working with “types/packages of data” called “species” (as opposed to underlying sets!), as well as the importance of 
obtaining “closed loops”  of such types/packages of data in order to e stablish set-theoretic conclusions.  Classical 
instances of such subtleties include the conjugacy indeterminacies inherent in the construction of the algebraic closure 
of a field and the closely related use of norms  in Galois theory, as well as the classical n otions of analytic 
continuation/Riemann surfaces (which is reminiscent of the classical dispute between Riemann and Weierstrass!) and 
geodesic completeness/closed geodesics.  We then proceed to survey recent developments (work in progress) in IUT, 
many of which are closely related to the Section Conjecture in anabelian geometry for arbitrary hyperbolic curves over 
number fields.  We also briefly mention recent progress on the Section Conjecture for hyperbolic curves over p- adic 
local fields, which is of interest in that it i s closely related to the use of Raynaud-Tamagawa “new-ordinariness” in 
recent results on “RNS”  (i.e., “resolution of nonsingularities”), in a fashion that may be regarded as a sort of p-adic 
local analogue of IUT.  In the case of the Section Conjecture for hyperbolic curves over number fields, recent progress 
is closely related to 3 new enhanced versions of IUT that are currently under development.  One of these new enhanced 
versions, namely, the Galois -orbit version  of IUT, has new applications not only to the Section Conjecture  for 
hyperbolic curves over number fields, but also to the nonexistence of Siegel zeroes of certain Dirichlet L -functions.  
The application to the Section Conjecture is interesting in that it exhibits and re confirms the essentially anabelian 
content of IUT, i.e., as a theory based on anabelian geometry that is applied to prove new results in anabelian geometry.  
On the other hand, these recent applications, taken together with the original application of IUT to the ABC/Szpiro/V ojta 
Conjectures, are also noteworthy in that they may be regarded as a striking example of Poincaré's famous quote to the 

effect that 
 
“mathematics is the art of giving the same name to different things”. 
 
That is to say , the common name “IUT”  that may be regarded as describing, in essence, a single mathematical 
phenomenon that manifests itself, depending on relatively inessential  (!) differences of context, as various (at first 
glance, unrelated!) diverse phenomena in anabelian geometry, diophantine geometry, and analytic number theory .  
The relationship with Poincaré's famous quote is also fascinating  in that it was apparently mo tivated by various 
mathematical observations on the part of Poincaré concerning the similarities between transformation group 
symmetries of modular functions such as theta functions and symmetry groups of the hyperbolic geometry of the upper 
half-plane --- all of which are topics (cf. the discussion above of Galois groups versus abstract groups!) that bear a 
profound relationship to IUT. 