REPOR T ON THE CURRENT SITUA TION
SURROUNDING INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM ¨ULLER
THEOR Y (IUT)
Shinichi Mochizuki
(RIMS, Kyoto University)
October 2025
Contents
§1. Journalism/story-telling versus the practice of mathematics 1
§1.1. Mathematical accountability and the EMSCOP 2
§1.2. Professional training versus ChatGPT-type “hallucinations” 2
§1.3. Disregard for fundamental democratic principles 4
§2. Detailed analysis of mathematical misunderstandings 5
§2.1. The issue of intrinsic contradictions in the set-up of IUT 6
§2.2. Issues of identiﬁcation: set-theoretic copies versus universes 9
§2.3. The issue of set-theoretic paradoxes 14
§2.4. Relation to recent developments in anabelian geometry 15
§3. Lean, the EMSCOP, and IUT 20
§3.1. Social/political dynamics versus mathematical truth 20
§3.2. The fundamental importance of Lean in the context of IUT 26
§1. Journalism/story-telling versus the practice of
mathematics
In September 2025, J. D. Boyd published an article [Ctv] on his SciSci
Research website exposing his views concerning the present situation sur-
rounding inter-universal Teichm¨ uller theory (IUT). This article is a highly
irresponsible piece of amateur journalism by an individual who lacks pro-
fessional training in the mathematics relevant to the article and is replete
with mathematically false and factually incorrect statements (cf. §2
below for more details), as well as numerous absurd conclusions based on
such statements. The purpose of the present report is to survey the current
situation surrounding IUT with an eye to
· minimizing the entirely unnecessary confusion that could po-
tentially be caused by this article [Ctv] (cf. the remainder of the
present §1, as well as §2 below, for more details), as well as to
· discussing recent progress toward the important goal of Lean-
style formalization of IUT (cf. §3 below for more details).
In the following, I will use the notation “p. nXY/8” for references to (the
September 26, 2025 version of) [Ctv]. Here, n ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8} denotes
the page “n/8” of [Ctv]; X ∈ {L, C, R} denotes the horizontal position (i.e.,
Left/Center/Right) on the page; Y ∈ {T, M, B} denotes the vertical position
1

2 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(i.e., Top/Middle/Bottom) on the page. Thus, searches for these references
may yield inaccurate results when applied to other versions of [Ctv]. On
the other hand, since we include in the present report direct quotations of
all portions of the text of [Ctv] that are discussed in the present report, the
present report is entirely self-contained, i.e., may be read without referring
directly to [Ctv].
§1.1. Mathematical accountability and the EMSCOP . First, it should
be noted (cf., e.g., the introductory portion of [Rpt23]) that IUT is a well
established mathematical theory that currently consists of ﬁve mathematical
papers published in two internationally recognized mathematical journals
and, in particular, has passed peer reviews for these journals. There are
also ﬁve (four published and one unpublished) survey papers on IUT. That
is to say, IUT is mathematics that is well understood by quite a number of
professional mathematicians and has been veriﬁed countless times since its
release in August 2012. In particular, this piece of amateur journalism [Ctv]
does not have any eﬀect whatsoever on the mathematical validity of IUT .
Frequently, in discussions of the responses by various people toward IUT,
I quote the following passage from Article 6 of the section “Responsibilities
of authors” of the Code of Practice of the European Mathematical Society
(i.e., the [EMSCOP]), which oversees the publishing company that publishes
the mathematical journal PRIMS, where the four original IUT papers were
published:
Mathematicians should make public claims of potential new
theorems only when they believe they are able to provide full
details in a timely manner, to avoid unnecessarily blocking
an active line of research.
This passage may be understood as expressing the fundamental importance
of mathematical accountability when making mathematical assertions in
public, i.e., the fundamental importance, for the practice of mathematics, of
avoiding the creation of blackholes with respect to mathematical account-
ability, where the validity of mathematical assertions becomes a matter of
social/political dynamics , such as “faith en masse” (cf. the discussion of
§3.1 below), rather than detailed, rigorous mathematical proofs (cf. the
discussion surrounding (BlkAcc) in [EssLgc], §1.12).
It is precisely for this reason that I have been very conservative in the past
with regard to engagements with journalists and deeply critical of preprints
such as those discussed in [Rpt24]. That is to say, articles written by jour-
nalists, as well as preprints such as those discussed in [Rpt24], lie in a realm
that is fundamentally external to the infrastructural apparatus that exists in
the ﬁeld of professional mathematics for long-term digestion and examina-
tion of the details of proofs of mathematical ideas and assertions, namely,
· internationally recognized mathematical journals with a functional
peer review system and
· lectures and workshops on the mathematics involved
(cf. the discussion surrounding (BlkAcc) in [EssLgc], §1.12).
§1.2. Professional training versus ChatGPT-type “hallucinations”.
Typically, journalists reporting on mathematics have no or little professional

IUT REPORT (OCTOBER 2025) 3
training in the mathematics that they are reporting on. In the case of [Ctv]
(or, more generally, SciSci Research, which, as I understand, is an organiza-
tion that consists of a single member), Boyd (according to the information
that I was given) holds a masters degree in a discipline whose precise rela-
tionship to the ﬁeld of pure mathematics is not clear; he does not hold a
doctoral degree and has not published any research papers in an interna-
tionally recognized mathematical journal in any ﬁeld of mathematics closely
related to arithmetic geometry (much less IUT). In the case of the preprints
discussed in [Rpt24], the author is a professional mathematician in a ﬁeld of
arithmetic geometry that is not directly relevant to the preprints, but has
not published any research papers in an internationally recognized mathe-
matical journal in either of the two ﬁelds that are directly relevant to the
subject matter discussed in the preprints, namely, p-adic Hodge theory and
IUT-related anabelian geometry, hence cannot be considered a professional
mathematician in either of these ﬁelds.
In all of these cases, the fundamental lack of a mathematical accountabil-
ity apparatus underlying the writing of the articles/preprints involved means
that their content becomes nothing more than an exercise in story-telling,
or arbitrary text generation , in the style of the so-called “hallucinations”
generated by LLM’s such as ChatGPT (cf. the discussion of [Rpt24], §1).
In this context, I am reminded of the phrase “linguistic trickery” that was
applied by one mathematician to describe the use of the term “arithmetic
holomorphic structure” in the preprints discussed in [Rpt24], as well as the
discussion of the ideas of H.G. Frankfurt in [Fsk] concerning the diﬀerence
between a person who simply lies while being explicitly aware of the dis-
crepancy between what he says and the reality of the situation and a person
who is locked in a behavioral pattern of mass generation of content that is
completely divorced from reality, but who has little or no explicit awareness
of this discrepancy between the content generated and the reality of the
situation. I am also reminded, as a result of my experiences as an editor of
a mathematical journal, of the numerous manuscripts submitted to journals
by amateur mathematicians that claim to prove famous conjectures in a few
pages using elementary techniques.
In the context of ChatGPT-type “hallucinations”, it is interesting to note
that it appears that currently research is underway to link LLM’s such as
ChatGPT to Lean, so that interaction and text generation by the LLM
can be supported by rigorous mathematical veriﬁcation via Lean. I heard
about this research in talks by Chinese researchers during a Lean work-
shop in Tokyo in July 2025, and, as I understand, this sort of technology
is still in a rather initial stage of development. On the other hand, this
sort of technological development is exciting in that it potentially (not in
the immediate future, but perhaps in the not so distant future) opens up
the possibility of preparing expository reports by LLM’s on mathematics
formalized in Lean that are not plagued by the inaccuracies of journalists
who do not have a rigorous understanding of the mathematics involved. It
also opens up the possibility that in the future, LLM’s linked to Lean can be
used by professional mathematicians to generate reports such as the present
report or [Rpt24] to address problematic documents such as [Ctv] or the

4 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
preprints discussed in [Rpt24], thus freeing mathematicians such as myself
from the burden (or perhaps dramatically reducing the burden) of preparing
manuscripts such as the present report or [Rpt24] by hand. We refer to §3
below for a more detailed discussion of Lean-related aspects of IUT.
§1.3. Disregard for fundamental democratic principles. As dis-
cussed in [Ctv], p. 1LT/8, the release of the article [Ctv] follows the release
of another article [Cnv] that surveys the ideas, as well as the history of the
development of the ideas, underlying IUT. Here, it should be noted that
I consented to participate in the series of interviews/discussions that lead
to [Cnv] precisely on the basis of Boyd’s repeated assurances that SciSci
Research represented a fundamentally new kind of scientiﬁc journalism , one
that would indeed take a responsible stance with regard to mathematical
accountability for the mathematical content of the articles. Typically, jour-
nalists prioritize political or proﬁt-related motives over accountability for
mathematical accuracy, often as a result of a business model that derives
proﬁt (e.g., in the form of internet clicks) precisely from sowing the seeds of
controversy, e.g., by using factually inaccurate content to generate entirely
unnecessary confusion (cf. the discussion of the internet/mass media as an
apple of discord in [EssLgc], Example 1.5.2). The highly irresponsible and
mathematically inaccurate content of [Ctv] thus amounts to an egregious
breach of trust — i.e., an outright betrayal — relative to the repeated
assurances that I received from Boyd in the period of time (between fall of
2023 and fall of 2024) leading up to the interviews of [Cnv]. This content
also explicitly contradicts Boyd’s assertion in [Ctv], p. 1CT/8, of the purely
mathematical nature of his intentions in writing [Ctv].
The views espoused by Boyd in [Ctv], most particularly concerning the
content of the Scholze-Stix manuscript, are in direct contradiction to the
views that he expressed on multiple occasions during our interviews (cf.,
e.g., the discussion of [Ctv], p. 8RB/8), namely, to the eﬀect that that it
was obvious even to an amateur observer that the main assertions of the
manuscript were absurd and meaningless. We also discussed the mathemat-
ical content of the Scholze-Stix manuscript and related mathematical topics
such as redundant copies in some detail, so there was ample opportunity
for him to discuss the issues that he raises in [Ctv], but he never did so.
That is to say, it is entirely inconceivable that the person that I thought I
knew by the name of “James Douglas Boyd” and interacted with, both elec-
tronically and in person, between the fall of 2023 and the fall of 2025 could
have written an article such as [Ctv]. Put another way, the very existence of
this article [Ctv] implies that the person that I thought I knew by the name
of “James Douglas Boyd” and interacted with, both electronically and in
person, between the fall of 2023 and the fall of 2025 was nothing more than
a cynical work of ﬁction .
It is diﬃcult for me to recall any time in my career as a mathematician
when I experienced a comparable level of overt fraud/duplicity/charlatanism
in a professional situation, and it has left me in a state of deep shock. Typ-
ically, interaction between professional mathematicians is conducted in a
candid, forthright fashion, at least with regard to substantive mathematical
issues. If Boyd feels strongly about the sort of issues that he raises with

IUT REPORT (OCTOBER 2025) 5
regard to IUT in [Ctv], there is absolutely no reason why he could not have
resolved them smoothly and essentially painlessly in one-to-one mathemat-
ical discussions between the two of us. This is typically the way in which
mathematical issues are resolved between professional mathematicians and
indeed the way in which numerous mathematical inaccuracies in preliminary
versions of [Cnv] were resolved between Boyd and myself during the period
between the fall of 2024 and the summer of 2025.
In this context, it is important to recall that the Scholze-Stix manuscript
has not been published in any internationally recognized mathematical
journal with a functional peer review system. The manuscript does not
contain any proof — or indeed even any precise statement — of the main
assertion of the manuscript, namely, that there is some sort of logical rela-
tionship between the simpliﬁed version of IUT exposed in the manuscript
and the original theory of [IUTchI, II, III, IV] (cf. [EssLgc], §3, for more
details). Rather, the manuscript simply states (in a passage that may be
found in the PDF ﬁle of the manuscript by performing a search for the
character string “restor”) that the authors are conﬁdent that restoring all
the details of the original theory would not aﬀect the validity of the conclu-
sions asserted in the manuscript. As discussed in [Rpt23], Scholze-Stix have
refused to respond to numerous oﬀers on my part by e-mail to engage in
further discussions (via e-mail/Zoom or in person) concerning the content
of their manuscript. As a result,
(Myst) it remains a complete mystery why — i.e., in the sense of a pre-
cise mathematical statement supported by a complete mathematical
proof with full details , in the spirit of the [EMSCOP] passage quoted
above — Scholze-Stix or indeed anyone else, including Boyd (cf. the
discussion of §2.1, §3.1 below!), assert(s) the existence of some sort of
logical relationship between the Scholze-Stix version of IUT and
the original theory of [IUTchI, II, III, IV].
During my interaction with Boyd between the fall of 2023 and the fall of
2025, I repeatedly emphasized the importance of mathematical accountabil-
ity and the [EMSCOP] passage discussed above, as well as the more general,
but nonetheless closely related, fundamental democratic principles of
the rule of law , due process of law , and burden of proof (cf. the discus-
sion at the beginning of [EssLgc], §1.10; the discussion of [EssLgc], Example
1.10.1, (v); the discussion surrounding (DngPrc) in [EssLgc], §1.12). In-
stances of dramatic and egregious ﬂip-ﬂops in position and policy are
often closely linked to a ﬂagrant disregard for such fundamental demo-
cratic principles/norms, and indeed this sort of phenomenon appears to be
increasingly prevalent — i.e., a sinister sort of “new normal” — in the cul-
ture and governing bodies of certain parts of the world today.
§2. Detailed analysis of mathematical misunderstandings
The mathematical misunderstandings of [Ctv] are deeply embedded
in the fabric of the narrative of [Ctv]. They are so numerous and fun-
damental that it is a formidable task to categorize and arrange these mis-
understandings in a form that is readily digestible for analysis. In §2.1,
§2.2, §2.3, we discuss three categories of misunderstandings, corresponding

6 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
to three distinct (but not entirely unrelated) mathematical issues . In-
terestingly (perhaps even ironically!), these misunderstandings concern the
logical structure not only of IUT, but also of the assertions of the Scholze-
Stix manuscript that is often cited, as well as of various elementary and
classical aspects of arithmetic geometry and indeed set-theoretic mathemat-
ics/mathematical reasoning in general. As discussed extensively in §1, these
misunderstandings stem essentially from Boyd’s short-sighted “hit-and-run ”
journalistic/story-telling approach to discussing mathematics, an approach
that is entirely divorced from any sort of functional apparatus for en-
suring long-term mathematical accountability . Indeed, I was entirely
unable to detect any evidence whatsoever in [Ctv] to the eﬀect that Boyd has
either the will, the explicit intention, or the technical capacity to give precise
statements or complete detailed proofs for any of the mathematically false
assertions discussed in the remainder of the present §2. Finally, in §2.4,
we discuss misunderstandings surrounding the developments in anabelian
geometry related to IUT that were discussed in [Ctv].
§2.1. The issue of intrinsic contradictions in the set-up of IUT.
Perhaps the most fundamental misunderstanding of [Ctv] lies in the following
false assertion :
(F A1) the Scholze-Stix manuscript shows the existence of a contradiction
intrinsic to the set-up of the log-theta-lattice of IUT.
This false assertion (F A1)may be seen in the following passages of [Ctv]:
· “Although the manuscript does not use the algorithms that Mochizuki
uses in the papers, it does indeed, taking the setup in which the
algorithms are applied (i.e., the log-theta-lattice), show that a con-
tradiction can be derived from this setup due to the inter-universal
approach that IUT applies to Diophantine inequalities.” ( [Ctv], p.
1RT/8);
· “The Scholze-Stix argument shows that if one simply removes the la-
bels from the beginning (by identifying the various copies of R), and
then looks at the theta-links, the contradictions become immediately
manifest.” ( [Ctv], p. 1RB/8);
· “The answer is that, although the overall setup clearly harbors these
contradictions, suspended by inter-universality, Mochizuki has ar-
gued that the papers are misunderstood,” ( [Ctv], p. 2LT/8);
· “On the other hand, the Scholze-Stix argument is essentially that
it’s unnecessary to consider such advanced algorithms since if one
just takes the setup and simpliﬁes it down, one ﬁnds it to contain a
contradiction-inducing mapping protected by labels which one might
just as soon remove.” ( [Ctv], p. 2LM/8);
· “it’s about the fact that the contradiction is there in the lattice
... with the theta-link, whereas Mochizuki’s algorithms essentially
promise a way around it. ... it’s about whether mathematicians are
conﬁdent enough in the basic setup, shown in simpliﬁed terms by
Scholze-Stix, to even consider the algorithms. ... it would essen-
tially require the mathematical community to agree to abstain from
deriving the contradiction from the setup, despite the ease of doing

IUT REPORT (OCTOBER 2025) 7
so, ... I think they’re unlikely to abstain from deriving the contra-
diction, since mathematicians can remove labels as they so choose
... Presenting IUT with the caveat that the setup is sensitive to set-
theoretic contradiction and one can only perform a key algorithmic
step under highly speciﬁc circumstances has been unconvincing.”
([Ctv], p. 2LB/8 ∼ 2CM/8);
· “One algorithm might avoid those statements, but if one can ﬁnd
another algorithm that reaches a contradiction, one shows the the-
ory to be inconsistent. ... if Scholze and Stix have an algorithm that
reaches a contradiction, then the theory of the lattice is inconsis-
tent. I think the key issue is that Mochizuki views the algorithms
as part of the theory, such that other contradictions are mathemat-
ically extrinsic. Nonetheless, I think most mathematicians view the
ease with which an immediate contradiction can be derived from the
setup as a sign to move on.” ( [Ctv], p. 5CM/8 ∼ 5RT/8);
· “My own outlook is that Lean won’t help in this case, since at is-
sue is this matter of label-removals and R-identiﬁcations. Lean ad-
mits distinct type-theoretic universes, which, as Carneiro discusses,
if viewed in a set-theoretic framework, are indeed Grothendieck uni-
verses. So, on the one hand, I can imagine one trying to formalize the
multiradial algorithms using type-theoretic universes with ‘distinct
labeling’, perhaps put in by hand. The IUT papers symbolically
label the Hodge theaters, q parameters, and other data (e.g., with †
or ‡). So, formalizing IUT in a manner consistent with the papers
would require encoding labels to prevent data from being identiﬁed.
One could give them labels, perhaps, with irreducible deﬁnitions (or
something like that), in order to make them resistant to equiva-
lences. On the other hand, to formalize the Scholze-Stix argument,
one would make the data readily amenable to identiﬁcation. I don’t
foresee Lean being good for resolving a dispute such as this. Whether
or not data is identiﬁed or kept distinct is a coding choice, just as
it is a symbolic choice in pen-and-paper math. I can imagine both
sides ﬁnding a way to code up their approach, only to dispute their
respective approaches.” ( [Ctv], p. 5RM/8 ∼ 5RB/8).
Before proceeding further, it should be stated categorically that there is
no contradiction in the set-up of the log-theta-lattice of IUT. The log-
theta-lattice consists of Hodge-theaters glued together via log-links and
theta-links. The construction of Hodge-theaters, which is the main topic
of [IUTchI], is a simple formal procedure, provided that one accepts results
in anabelian geometry and the theory of Frobenioids that are established in
earlier papers. In a similar vein, the construction of log-links and theta-links
follows formally from the fact that the prime-strips that appear in the do-
main/codomain of the log-link and theta-link are isomorphic, which again
follows formally from the various deﬁnitions involved.
If this false assertion (F A1)were true, then it would follow formally that
(F A1.1) the log-theta-lattice does not exist , hence, in particular, is not well
deﬁned.

8 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Here, I should emphasize that never in the period of time from August 2012
(when the IUT papers [IUTchI, II, III, IV] were released) till the present
have I seen any assertions by any professional mathematician to the eﬀect
that (F A1.1) holds. Note that this includes the Scholze-Stix manuscript,
my discussions with Scholze-Stix and Hoshi in March 2018, and subsequent
internet/mass media comments by Scholze-Stix.
In this context, it is also important to note that if the false assertion
(F A1.1)were true, then it would follow formally (i.e., since the multiradial
representation for the theta-pilot in IUT logically depends , in an essential
way, on the existence/well-deﬁned nature of the log-theta-lattice) that
(F A1.2) the multiradial representation for the theta-pilot in IUT (i.e., the
algorithm summarized in the statement of [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11)
does not exist , hence, in particular, is not well deﬁned .
Again, I should emphasize that never in the period of time from August 2012
(when the IUT papers [IUTchI, II, III, IV] were released) till the present
have I seen any assertions by any professional mathematician to the eﬀect
that (F A1.2) holds. Note that this includes the Scholze-Stix manuscript,
my discussions with Scholze-Stix and Hoshi in March 2018, and subsequent
internet/mass media comments by Scholze-Stix.
On the contrary, Scholze-Stix repeatedly emphasized — i.e., during the
March 2018 discussions, as well as in their manuscript — that they do
not contest the mathematical validity of [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11 (i.e., the
algorithm for the multiradial representation for the theta-pilot). Rather,
their central assertion — both during the March 2018 discussions, as well
as in the argument involving identifying copies of R in the ﬁnal two pages
of their manuscript — is the assertion that
(SSA1) they do not see how to derive any nontrivial diophantine conse-
quences, i.e., such as height inequalities, from the theory of [IUTchI,
II, III, IV].
That is to say,
(SSA2) the argument involving identifying copies of R in the ﬁnal two pages
of their manuscript consists of their interpretation/simpliﬁcation of
the set-up (i.e., involving the log-theta-lattice) and argument of
[IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12.
As discussed in (Myst) (cf. also the discussion surrounding (Myst) in §1.3,
as well as [EssLgc], §3, for more details), there is in fact no logical rela-
tionship between the Scholze-Stix interpretation/simpliﬁcation referred to
in (SSA2) and the set-up (i.e., involving the log-theta-lattice) and argument
of [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12.
Finally, we note that formalization via Lean4 of the sort of mathe-
matics that appears in the construction of Hodge-theaters or the multira-
dial representation of [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11, is, at least at a theoretical
level, an entirely straightforward issue (cf. the discussion of (NoObs)
in §3.2 below). Of course, it would require a tremendous amount of work,
perhaps on the order of several years, depending, for instance, on how much
of the anabelian geometry and theory of Frobenioids of earlier papers one
is willing to assume as a “blackbox” (cf. the discussion of (BBxFm) in §3.2

IUT REPORT (OCTOBER 2025) 9
below for more details), but the fundamental point that must be emphasized
in this context is that the falsiﬁcation (i.e., veriﬁcation of the falsehood)
of false assertions such as (F A1.1)and (F A1.2)is (at least at a theoretical
level) precisely the sort of task at which Lean4 excels . That it to say, it is
entirely inconceivable that, as is asserted in [Ctv], p. 5RM/8 ∼ 5RB/8,
(F A1.3) Lean4 is fundamentally incapable of conﬁrming the falsity of ( (F A1.1)
and (F A1.2), hence also of) (F A1).
In particular, it is entirely absurd to assert, as is done in [Ctv], p. 5CB/8
∼ 5RT/8, that
(F A1.4) the falsiﬁcation of (F A1)is a sort of subjective issue whose validity
depends on the point of view of the mathematician in question.
Indeed, assertions such as (F A1.3), (F A1.4) directly contradict the funda-
mental nature of logical reasoning in mathematics. In this context, it is
also important to note, again as a matter of elementary logic , the following
Existence Principle :
(ExPr) the existence of an algorithm (i.e., such as the Scholze-Stix inter-
pretation/simpliﬁcation of (SSA2)) that is unsuccessful in yielding
any nontrivial consequences (i.e., such as diophantine inequalities)
does not, in any way, imply the non-existence/falsehood of an algo-
rithm (i.e., such as the actual content of [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11
and Corollary 3.12) that is successful in yielding nontrivial conse-
quences.
§2.2. Issues of identiﬁcation: set-theoretic copies versus universes.
Another fundamental misunderstanding of [Ctv] lies in the following false
assertion:
(F A2) contradictions in IUT are avoided by means of the “extraordinary/no-
vel” approach of assigning distinct labels to diﬀerent universes .
This false assertion (F A2)may be seen in the following passages of [Ctv]:
· “Otherwise-contradictory relations between data imposed by certain
links are oﬀset by assigning data to diﬀerent universes with distinct
labels, with this inter-universal setup giving rise to many copies of
R.” ( [Ctv], p. 1RM/8);
· “The answer is that, although the overall setup clearly harbors these
contradictions, suspended by inter-universality, Mochizuki has ar-
gued that the papers are misunderstood, ...” ( [Ctv], p. 2LT/8);
· “It’s an extraordinary situation, due to the novelty of using inter-
universality to suspend contradictions with labels.” ( [Ctv], p. 2LB/8);
· “amounts to working with diﬀerently labeled data assigned to dif-
ferent universes and independently manipulating them to behave as
they would in a contradictory relationship without letting the contra-
diction occur, unless one removes the labels (the crux of the dispute
with Scholze-Stix).” ( [Ctv], p. 3CT/8);
· “I think the answer, in part, is that 1) the theory depends on inter-
universality, 2) the general necessity of universes is already debated
in mathematics today, and 3) IUT’s use of universe-based labeling for

10 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
suspending contradictions fails under general label-removal.” ( [Ctv],
p. 4CB/8);
· “In IUT, however, universes have a further role: to protect against
contradictions. Mochizuki even distinguishes his work from the Gro-
thendieck school in that IUT uses labels for relations that do not re-
spect the labels (which means contradictions ensue without them).”
([Ctv], p. 5LM/8).
This sort of provocative/sensationalist/exoticist/apocalyptic narra-
tive may make for great entertainment from the point of view of many
internet users, but has absolutely nothing to do with the rather mundane
mathematical reality of what is actually done in IUT:
(LB1) contradictions of the sort that occur in the argument on the ﬁnal
two pages of the Scholze-Stix manuscript are avoided in IUT not by
assigning distinct labels to diﬀerent universes (i.e., as in (F A2)), but
rather by assigning distinct labels to diﬀerent elements/sets ,
i.e., as is the standard practice when working with any sort of set-
theoretic object in mathematics.
That is to say, the distinct labels in question in (LB1) are precisely the
(entirely set-theoretic!) labels (n, m), where n, m are integers, of the ver-
tices of the oriented graph underlying the log-theta-lattice (each of which
corresponds to a distinct Hodge theater). This is an entirely standard set-
theoretic convention/apparatus that is applied throughout mathematics for
working with distinct elements/sets. There is absolutely nothing that is
“extraordinary/novel” about this use of distinct labels.
Here, we note that it is true that at these distinct labels ( n, m), distinct
rings/schemes arise, which give rise to distinct Galois categories , hence,
in particular, to distinct universes . On the other hand, there is abso-
lutely nothing that is qualitatively diﬀerent, at a foundational level, about
this situation from the situation that arises classically in SGA1, where set-
theoretically distinct schemes occur that give rise to distinct Galois cat-
egories, hence, in particular, to distinct universes. That is to say, at a
foundational level, the circumstances in IUT that trigger the introduction
of distinct universes in IUT are precisely identical to the circumstances in
SGA1 that trigger the introduction of distinct universes in SGA1; moreover,
these circumstances in both cases are entirely classical and set-theoretic in
nature, i.e., the use of distinct labels when working with distinct set-theoretic
objects, such as schemes. Here, we recall for the reader that in any classical
discussion of schemes that involves, say, two distinct schemes , it is entirely
standard mathematical practice to use distinct labels , e.g., “ S” and “ T ” for
the two distinct schemes, rather than, say, the same label “X” for the two
distinct schemes.
One fundamental misunderstanding of [Ctv] that is closely related to
(F A2) — and indeed may be regarded as a sort of “corollary” of (F A2)
— lies in the following false assertion :
(F A2.1) IUT suﬀers (as a consequence of (F A2)) from the fundamental defect
of exhibiting a “vulnerability” or lack of “robustness” when subject
to arbitrary label-removals.

IUT REPORT (OCTOBER 2025) 11
This false assertion (F A2.1)may be seen in the following passages of [Ctv]:
· “The Scholze-Stix argument shows that if one simply removes the la-
bels from the beginning (by identifying the various copies of R), and
then looks at the theta-links, the contradictions become immediately
manifest.” ( [Ctv], p. 1RB/8);
· “I think they’re unlikely to abstain from deriving the contradiction,
since mathematicians can remove labels as they so choose ... Present-
ing IUT with the caveat that the setup is sensitive to set-theoretic
contradiction and one can only perform a key algorithmic step un-
der highly speciﬁc circumstances has been unconvincing.” ( [Ctv], p.
2CT/8 ∼ 2CM/8);
· “Their algorithm shows that the necessity of inter-universality is
also a vulnerability in the lattice; it’s not robust against arbitrary
label-removals.” ( [Ctv], p. 5CT/8).
In fact, this sort of “vulnerability” assertion (F A2.1)reﬂects a fundamental
misunderstanding, on the part of [Ctv], of the way in which set-theoretic
mathematics works (cf. the discussion following (LB1)!). Indeed, this “vul-
nerability” phenomenon is by no means limited to IUT; rather, it is an
immediate consequence of the very nature of set theory that
(LB2) no nontrivial set-theoretic mathematical structure/theory
(where, in this context, “nontrivial” may be understood as meaning
that the structure/theory involves at least one set of cardinality ≥ 2)
is “robust” with respect to “arbitrary label-removals” .
This phenomenon may be seen in
· the discussion of the projective line/sphere in [EssLgc], Example
2.4.7, as well as in
· the discussion of “∧-/∨-crystals” in [EssLgc], §3.5
— i.e., examples that are particularly pertinent in light of the interesting
structural analogies of the situations that arise in these examples with the
situation that arises in IUT. On the other hand, as discussed above, this
phenomenon is by no means limited to these examples and indeed appears
in essentially any discussion of set-theoretic mathematical objects . For in-
stance, one may witness this phenomenon explicitly in the following very
elementary example involving the additive structure of the set N of natural
numbers:
Example 2.2.1: The eﬀect of arbitrary label-removals on addition
of natural numbers. Write N† for the quotient set of N obtained by
identifying the elements 2 ∈ N and 3 ∈ N, i.e., by “removing the distinct
labels” from the two distinct elements of N constituted by “2” and “3”. Thus,
if one assumes that addition of natural numbers in N is suﬃciently “robust”
in the sense that it is unaﬀected by the label-removal that gives rise to N†,
then one immediately obtains the contradiction 1 + 3 = 3. In fact, of course,
this “contradiction” does not imply the existence of any intrinsic defect in
the theory of addition of natural numbers; rather, it simply implies that
there is no logical relationship between addition in N and the operation
induced on N† by addition in N, i.e., no logical relationship that allows one to

12 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
deduce statements concerning addition in N from corresponding statements
concerning the induced operation on N†.
Before proceeding, we recall that the phenomenon of “distinct labels for
diﬀerent universes” (cf. (F A2)) appears classically in the theory of
(DfUv1) the proﬁnite fundamental group associated to a Galois category, de-
veloped in SGA1, as well as
(DfUv2) the general nonsense of homological algebra surrounding derived func-
tors such as cohomology functors
(cf. the discussion of (AlgCl), (HomRs) in [EssLgc], §3.8). Here, we note
that in both of these cases, the necessity of passing to a larger universe
in order to obtain a canonical construction of the object of interest (i.e.,
proﬁnite fundamental group or cohomology module) is a very substantive
issue that is classically well understood and by no means “a matter of taste”.
Moreover, in both of these cases (DfUv1), (DfUv2), identiﬁcation of the
larger universe with the original universe — i.e., removal of the distinct
labels for diﬀerent universes (cf. (F A2)) — would result in a contradiction,
namely, in the form of a clear violation of the axiom of foundation . That
is to say, the classical theory of, say, ´ etale fundamental groups of schemes
(which is the main topic of ´ etale homotopy theory!) does not satisfy Boyd’s
“robustness” criterion, despite the fact that Boyd actively endorses (cf., e.g.,
the discussion of [Ctv], p. 8CT/8 ∼ 8CM/8) ´ etale homotopy theory as a
topic of mathematical research that, unlike IUT, he ﬁnds to be “acceptable”.
Presumably, Boyd would also endorse the use of a very classical tool such
as cohomology modules in mathematical research as “acceptable”.
In the case of (DfUv1), this necessity arises from the nonexistence of
a canonical choice of basepoint , which, in the very classical setting of the
Galois theory of ﬁelds, corresponds to the nonexistence of a canonical choice
of algebraic closure of a perfect ﬁeld. Indeed, if one assumes the existence
of a (functorially) canonical choice of algebraic closure, then, as discussed
in [EssLgc], Example 3.8.1, it is very easy to derive a contradiction. Here,
we note that canonical constructions play an important role in the theory of
the ´ etale fundamental group— hence, in particular, in anabelian geometry
and ´ etale homotopy theory — for instance, in situations where one wishes
to consider functorially induced canonical outer actions of groups on ´ etale
fundamental groups.
In the case of (DfUv1), the nonexistence of a canonical choice of base-
point manifests itself concretely in the theory of ´ etale fundamental groups
developed in SGA1 in the form of inner automorphism indetermina-
cies. As I have emphasized in countless workshop talks and expository texts
(cf., e.g., the discussion of [EssLgc], §3.8), as well as in the discussions with
Boyd that led to [Cnv] (cf. [Ctv], p. 4RT/8),
(SGAIU) there is absolutely no qualitative diﬀerence , at a foundational
level, between
· the use of universes/inter-universality phenomena in the classi-
cal theory of ´ etale fundamental groupsdeveloped in SGA1 and
· the use of universes/inter-universality phenomena in IUT;

IUT REPORT (OCTOBER 2025) 13
the only diﬀerence lies in the particular sorts of set-theoretic objects
that appear, namely,
· rings/schemes in the case of SGA1 versus
· “non-ring-theoretic” abstract topological groups/monoids (i.e.,
objects which are typically weaker than ring structures and
hence give rise, in IUT, to more substantial indeterminacies,
such as (Ind1), (Ind2), than the relatively minor inner auto-
morphism indetermacies of SGA1) in the case of IUT
(cf. the discussion of [EssLgc], §3.8, preceding Example 3.8.1, as well
as the discussion of [EssLgc], §3.8, following Example 3.8.4).
In the case of (DfUv2), the necessity of passing to a larger universe in
order to obtain a canonical construction arises from the nonexistence of a
canonical choice of (injective/projective) resolution for a module. That is
to say, any sort of attempt to give a canonical construction, e.g., by tak-
ing the product over “all possible resolutions” in some model of set theory,
immediately leads to a violation of the axiom of foundation, unless one
works in a larger universe. This nonexistence of a canonical choice of res-
olution manifests itself concretely in the “indeterminacies” constituted by
homotopy equivalences of resolutions, i.e., “indeterminacies” that may be
factored out precisely by passing to cohomology modules (or, more gener-
ally, higher derived functors). Moreover, it is interesting to note in passing
that these two classical examples of inter-universality/indeterminacies (i.e.,
(DfUv1), (DfUv2)) constitute, when taken together, a classical example of
two theories that, on the one hand,
· exhibit qualitatively essentially identical phenomena at the level of
foundational considerations concerning universes/inter-university, but,
on the other hand,
· involve the use of diﬀerent types of set-theoretic objects, as well as
diﬀerent types of indetermacies
— i.e., in a fashion that is reminiscent of the above comparison (SGAIU) of
universes/inter-universality in SGA1 and IUT.
In the context of (DfUv1), (DfUv2), we observe in passing that if one is
willing to sacriﬁce the canonicality of the construction, then one can always
avoid the use of universes by working with small Galois categories (in the
case of (DfUv1)) or small collections of resolutions (in the case of (DfUv2)),
where the term “small” is to be understood as being relative to a ﬁxed
model of ZFC that is ﬁxed throughout the discussion. On the other hand,
as discussed above, this does not allow one to avoid the substantive “inter-
universal” phenomenon of indeterminacies, i.e., inner automorphisms (in the
case of (DfUv1), which, as discussed in [EssLgc], Example 3.8.1, are unavoid-
able) or homotopy equivalences of resolutions (in the case of (DfUv2)). The
same phenomenon exists in the case of IUT (cf. the discussion of (SGAIU)
above):
(SmCat) by sacriﬁcing canonicality , one can avoid the use of universes by
working with small categories, but again the unavoidable substan-
tive aspect of the situation lies in the “inter-universality” of the
various situations considered, i.e., which manifests itself concretely
in the various indeterminacies that occur.

14 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Finally, it is interesting to note that the very substantive classical phe-
nomena discussed above in the context of (DfUv1), (DfUv2) are faithfully
reﬂected in Lean4 formalizations . That is to say, I personally found
it fascinating to learn, during the Lean workshop in Tokyo in July 2025,
that ﬁrst of all, Lean4 allows for the use of countably nested universes,
and, moreover, that this apparatus for nested universes is actually applied
in the recently achieved Lean4 formalizations of the classical constructions
of (DfUv1), (DfUv2) (cf. also the discussion of (NoObs) in §3.2 below). I
found this aspect of Lean4 formalization to be particularly impressive on ac-
count of the fact that these two classical situations (i.e., (DfUv1), (DfUv2))
are precisely the situations that I have been emphasizing for many years (of
course, completely independently of any considerations related to Lean4!) in
the context of explanations (such as the explanation given in [EssLgc], §3.8)
of the use of universes/inter-universality in IUT.
§2.3. The issue of set-theoretic paradoxes. The ﬁnal type of fun-
damental mathematical misunderstanding of [Ctv] that we discuss may be
summarized in the following false assertion :
(F A3) Various objects, such as prime-strips and theta-links, that play a
fundamental role in IUT trigger set-theoretic paradoxes .
This false assertion (F A3)may be seen in the following passages of [Ctv]:
· “This alone is an untenable method: an equivalence between qj2
and q triggers a cascade of set-theoretic paradoxes, which Mochizuki
calls ‘ ∈-loops’. However, one needs these ‘ ∈-loops’, without contra-
diction.” ( [Ctv], p. 3LM/8);
· “Simulating ‘ ∈-loops’ amounts to working with diﬀerently labeled
data assigned to diﬀerent universes and independently manipulating
them to behave as they would in a contradictory relationship without
letting the contradiction occur, unless one removes the labels (the
crux of the dispute with Scholze-Stix).” ( [Ctv], p. 3CT/8);
· “So, the theta-link threatens to trigger set-theoretic paradoxes, ...”
([Ctv], p. 3CM/8);
· “one responds to the failure of the isogeny method with a simulation
method (e.g., prime-strips, theta-links); one responds to the set-
theoretic paradoxes of the simulation method with inter-universality
(e.g., diﬀerent labels, Hodge theaters); ...” ( [Ctv], p. 3RT/8).
First of all, it must stated categorically that the use of prime-strips and
theta-links in IUT does not trigger any set-theoretic paradoxes. Rather,
the use of prime-strips and theta-links is simply incompatible, in a very ele-
mentary set-theoretic sense, with the additive portion of the ring structures
involved, thus obligating one to work with various non-ring-theoretic struc-
tures such as multiplicative monoids or Galois groups regarded as abstract
topological groups (cf. the discussion of (SGAIU) in §2.3).
The “simulation of ‘ ∈-loops’” in IUT does not involve any set-theoretic
paradoxes whatsoever. It simply refers to phenomena in which there is a
certain kind of equivalence between the behavior of a certain portion of some
mathematical object and the behavior of the whole mathematical object, i.e.,

IUT REPORT (OCTOBER 2025) 15
in a fashion that is reminiscent, at a purely philosophical level, of the relation
‘a ∈ a’, but does not give rise to any set-theoretic paradoxes in the literal
sense. Well-known classical examples of this sort of phenomenon include the
following:
· the case of a modular curve (i.e., a ﬁnite ´ etale covering of the moduli
stack of elliptic curves over the rational number ﬁeld) of genus 1,
i.e., an “elliptic curve” whose set of closed points may be thought of
as corresponding to the entire set of isomorphism classes of (char-
acteristic zero) elliptic curves (equipped with some additional data
such as a level structure);
· the classical theory of complex functions of a single holomorphic
variable z = x+iy, which behaves like a single (complex holomorphic)
dimension as a result of a sort of coupling of the ( a priori distinct
and independent) two underlying real dimensions corresponding to
“x” and “ y”.
§2.4. Relation to recent developments in anabelian geometry . We
conclude the present §2 by discussing various misunderstandings and mis-
leading content surrounding the recent developments in anabelian geometry
related to IUT that were discussed in [Ctv]. These misunderstandings and
misleading content center around the following main thesis of the discussion
of [Ctv], p. 6/8 ∼ 8/8:
(AnMs1) The anabelian content of IUT (cf. Boyd’s use of the term “arithmetic
Teichm¨ uller theory”) can somehow be separated and isolated from
the portions/aspects of IUT that relate to the abc inequality , thus
allowing one (such as Boyd) to take a positive position toward the
former, while maintaining a negative position toward the latter.
This point of view (AnMs1) may be seen in the following passages of [Ctv]:
· “Scholze and Stix don’t give much attention to the anabelian ge-
ometry in IUT, as they remark in their manuscript that they don’t
see how absolute anabelian geometry, which they suggest is indeed
a remarkable development in anabelian geometry, is needed for the
IUT proof.” ( [Ctv], p. 6LM/8);
· “p-adic Teichm¨ uller theory had its own book; arithmetic Teichm¨ uller
theory never got its own treatment. So, the novel anabelian content
in IUT, in which one might a priori have the most conﬁdence, was
overshadowed both due to the proof controversy and the fact that the
IUT papers basically jump straight into building Hodge theaters and
pursuing the proof without explaining what this new Teichm¨ uller
theory really is.” ( [Ctv], p. 6CB/8 ∼ 6RT/8);
· “The other issue, in my view, is that of distinguishing the arithmetic
Teichm¨ uller theory from the rest of IUT. I still think one should be
able to distinguish the Teichm¨ uller-theoretic aspects of IUT from
the abc proof strategy and even the inter-universal setup.” ( [Ctv],
p. 6RM/8);
· “The multiradial representation is supposed to be a very general
result about the multiplicative/additive structure of scheme theory

16 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
that one learns from arithmetic fundamental groups via the study
of non-scheme-theoretic maps and anabelian reconstructions, but if
that’s the case, it should be amenable to formulation in a manner
independent of the setup involving Hodge theaters, prime-strips, and
the theta-link. Very few people care about it because of the IUT
baggage. I don’t see why the main result of arithmetic Teichm¨ uller
theory couldn’t just be formulated in the familiar terminology of
schemes, non-scheme-theoretic morphisms, arithmetic fundamental
groups, anabelian reconstruction, and so on, with a short and simple
paper.” ( [Ctv], p. 6RB/8 ∼ 7LT/8);
· “... the notion of studying arithmetic fundamental groups under
non-scheme-theoretic mappings and reconstructions is interesting.
However, I doubt many will take an interest if it is instantiated as
the multiradial representation, with is attached to the abc proof
strategy; there must be ways to explain this research area in rela-
tively plain arithmetic-geometric language.” ( [Ctv], p. 7LM/8);
· “Mochizuki has himself said to me that he’s not particularly inter-
ested in abc. Other mathematicians who have engaged with IUT,
such as Assistant Professor Emmanuel Lepage (from the Institut de
Math´ ematiques de Jussieu-Paris Rive Gauche), have, according to
Mochizuki, also said that they are not interested in abc. Usually,
only mathematicians indiﬀerent to abc and well-versed in anabelian
geometry have walked away satisﬁed.” ( [Ctv], p. 7CT/8);
· “From an anabelian perspective, looking at non-scheme-theoretic
mappings is intriguing, for one might see how arithmetic fundamen-
tal groups behave, namely by decoupling arithmetic fundamental
groups, as groups, from schemes, and ﬁnding new functorial rela-
tionships. However, one doesn’t need to consider the theta-link or
Hodge theaters to study this, as evidenced by applications to top-
ics like GT-construction. It should be generalizable, without the
IUT baggage; that would make it an arithmetic Teichm¨ uller the-
ory.” ( [Ctv], p. 8LM/8);
· “This research area, when viewed in its own right, is so simple and
curiosity-provoking. As I heard repeatedly that Mochizuki and col-
leagues aren’t particularly interested in abc, I thought it such a
shame that the mathematics of most interest to them has been
swept up in the abc proof controversy, one which I doubt will end
in Mochizuki’s favor. On the other hand, within the high-trust con-
ﬁnes of AHGT, which is a very well managed collaborative project,
I think there’s space being created for setting drama aside and in-
stead forming connections over the anabelian and ´ etale-homotopic
core that underlies the arithmetic-Teichm¨ uller-theoretic content that
one sees implicitly in the IUT papers. I still see these forthcoming
‘Interface Papers’, whose contents I do not know, as an opportunity
to spell out the ´ etale-homotopic and anabelian core of arithmetic
Teichm¨ uller theory, and perhaps really deﬁne it as a theory, distinct
from absolute anabelian geometry and distinct from IUT.” ( [Ctv],
p. 8LB/8 ∼ 8CM/8).

IUT REPORT (OCTOBER 2025) 17
In some sense, the fundamental point that seems to be missed here is that
(SmMth) the mathematics that gives rise to a proof of the abc inequality in
IUT is precisely the same mathematics as the mathematics that
involves the multiradial representation and absolute anabelian ge-
ometry and is closely related to the theory of GT in combinatorial
anabelian geometry; that is to say, although it may seem to make
sense to distinguish the two from a social, political, psychological,
or rhetorical point of view, when regarded from the point of view of
the actual mathematics involved, this sort of distinction is math-
ematically meaningless .
Here, it is interesting to note that the meaninglessness of this distinction
(SmMth) is already evident in various assertions that appear explicitly in
Boyd’s argument. For instance, he speaks of separating, for instance, in a
“short and simple paper”, the “novel anabelian content in IUT” and the
multiradial representation of IUT from the “IUT baggage” consisting of
Hodge theaters, prime-strips, and the theta-link, but it is self-evident from
the very statement/content of the multiradial representation of IUT (i.e.,.
[IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11) that this is nothing more than a meaningless self-
contradiction. Moreover, despite the fact that Boyd speaks of separating
the multiradial representation of IUT from the “abc proof strategy” and
the “inter-universal setup”, he also doubts that people will be interested in
anabelian aspects of non-scheme-theoretic mappings if they are introduced
via the multiradial representation of IUT on account of the fact that the
multiradial representation of IUT is “attached to the abc proof strategy”.
Indeed,
· the “Teichm¨ uller-theoretic aspects of IUT”,
· the multiradial representation of IUT,
· the “abc proof strategy” of IUT,
· the “inter-universal set-up” of IUT involving distinct copies of Hodge
theaters, and
· the anabelian aspects of “non-scheme-theoretic mappings”
refer to diﬀerent aspects of, or ways of thinking about, precisely the same
mathematical content .
In this context, it is also important to note that the aspects that Boyd
refers to as the “arithmetic Teichm¨ uller-theoretic” aspects of the theory
of GT in combinatorial anabelian geometry also involve the use of distinct
copies of rings and inter-universality in a fashion that is entirely similar to
the way in which these aspects appear in IUT. In particular, it is entirely
mathematically meaningless , to hold up, as Boyd does, this theory of
GT as an example of separation of the issues of distinct copies and inter-
universality from what he refers to as “the ´ etale-homotopic and anabelian
core of arithmetic Teichm¨ uller theory”. Moreover, it is important to recall
in this context (cf., e.g., the discussion of [EssLgc], Example 3.5.3, (vi)) that
the “general nonsense” aspect of either IUT or the combinatorial anabelian
geometry theory of GT that involves distinct copies of (arithmetic) holomor-
phic structures is by no means unique to arithmetic theories such as IUT or
the combinatorial anabelian geometry theory of GT and may also be seen
in classical complex Teichm¨ uller theory. Indeed, this analogy with distinct

18 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
copies in classical complex Teichm¨ uller theory, as well as the analogy with
distinct copies in the classical theory of crystals (the discussion of “∧-/∨-
crystals” in [EssLgc], §3.5), underscores the fact that this aspect of IUT has
already been amply exposed on countless occasions and for many years now
in “relatively plain arithmetic-geometric language” .
Recent developments relating enhanced versions of IUT (that are cur-
rently under development) to the Section Conjecture (for hyperbolic curves
over number ﬁelds) in anabelian geomtery are another important topic —
i.e., alongside the combinatorial anabelian geometry theory of GT referred
to above — of recent anabelian geometry-related research that is also related
to IUT. Such recent developments involving the Section Conjecture also (i.e.,
again alongside the combinatorial anabelian geometry theory of GT referred
to above) form an important topic of the “interface papers” (which are cur-
rently under preparation) referred to by Boyd. On the other hand, in this
context, it must be noted that the application of IUT to the abc inequality
is literally a special case of the application of (enhanced versions of) IUT
to the Section Conjecture. In particular, this aspect of these recent develop-
ments again underscores just how mathematically meaningless it is to
try to separate anabelian aspects of IUT from aspects of IUT related to the
abc inequality.
With regard to the many anabelian geometers, such as Emmanuel Lep-
age, who have achieved a rigorous mathematical understanding of IUT, it
is indeed accurate to state that such researchers are primarily interested in
the anabelian aspects of IUT and are not particularly interested in the abc
inequality per se , and that this stance in also reﬂected in my own point of
view regarding IUT. (Incidentally, it should be mentioned that Lepage holds
the position of “ma ˆ ıtre de conf´ erences”. This position is a tenured position,
which, in some contexts, may be translated as “assistant professor”, but is
more commonly translated as “lecturer” or “associate professor”.) On the
other hand, it is substantially misleading to summarize their involvement
with a highly ambiguous phrase such as “walked away satisﬁed” . For in-
stance, this phrase could be taken — especially in the context of the main
thesis (AnMs1) of the discussion of [Ctv], p. 6/8 ∼ 8/8 — to mean that
they completely concurred with the fundamental misunderstandings (F A1),
(F A2), and (F A3)of Boyd, but were nevertheless satisﬁed with the purely
anabelian content of IUT in a form that, as Boyd advocates, was completely
separated from the aspects of IUT that relate to the abc inequality.
In the case of Lepage, the discussion referred to in [Ctv], p. 7CT/8,
arose in response to a question posed by me concerning why he, unlike
various other mathematicians, was able to study and achieve a rigorous
mathematical understanding of IUT. One important portion of his reponse
was that he was able to do so because his primary interest was (not in the
abc inequality itself, but rather) in the anabelian geometry aspects of IUT,
namely, in
(AnDio1) seeing how such anabelian geometry aspects could give rise to dio-
phantine consequences such as the abc inequality.
This point of view is essentially identical to my own and also shared by other
anabelian geometers who are substantively engaged with the mathematical

IUT REPORT (OCTOBER 2025) 19
content of IUT. That is to say, his response refers to the psychological mind-
set that distinguished him from various other mathematicians with regard to
studying IUT and achieving a rigorous level of mathematical understanding
that was such that, in response to another question of mine, he conﬁrmed
that he was unable to see any mathematical reason not to acknowledge the
mathematical validity of IUT. In particular,
(AnDio2) at no time has he, or any other anabelian geometer substantively
engaged with the mathematical content of IUT, ever expressed any
opinion to me to the eﬀect that it is possible to separate/isolate,
at the level of mathematical content (e.g., logical dependence), the
anabelian aspects of IUT from the diophantine aspects of IUT in
such a way that one could conﬁrm the mathematical validity of the
former, while denying the mathematical validity of the latter (cf.
(AnMs1)).
In this context, it is also interesting to note that the “strategic ambiguity”
of Boyd’s use of the phrase “walked away satisﬁed” is reminiscent of his
phrasing to the eﬀect that the mathematical validity of the false assertion
(F A1)is a sort of subjective issue that depends on the point of view of the
mathematician in question (cf. (F A1.3), (F A1.4)).
We conclude the present §2.4 with a discussion of the
(AnMs2) activities of the CNRS and AHGT and the role of Stix in these and
related activities.
In the case of (AnMs2), the problem is not with clear-cut inaccuracies related
to (AnMs2) that appear in the text of [Ctv] (which I was unable to ﬁnd),
but rather with the potential for misunderstandings by third parties that
might arise from the discussion of (AnMs2) in [Ctv].
First of all, although IUT is one of the topics covered by the AHGT
network, which is supported by the CNRS, it is just one topic among a large
variety of topics in arithmetic geometry that are covered by the AHGT.
Perhaps the most succinct way to summarize this relationship is by observing
that the relationship of IUT Summit 2025 with AHGT is only mentioned
in small print at the bottom of the page on the webpages of the website for
IUT Summit 2025 .
The involvement of Stix with AHGT activities is mentioned in the text
of [Ctv], p. 7CB/8 and p. 7RB/8. In this context, we note that Stix was
listed as an online participant in IUT Summit 2025 . This listing occurred
as a result of a very brief e-mail exchange in which he expressed an inter-
est in looking at the videos of talks given in IUT Summit 2025 . In fact,
the total amount of time of his online participation in IUT Summit 2025
was, according to the data that we were given, “0 minutes”. During the
week following IUT Summit 2025 , Stix participated in a workshop given at
Osaka University, Japan, in honor of Hiroaki Nakamura’s 60-th birthday.
At this workshop, just as in the case of the Oberwolfach workshop referred
to in [Ctv], p. 7RB/8, he interacted with many anabelian geometers who
are substantially involved in activities related to IUT. According to what I
heard from other participants in both the Osaka University and Oberwol-
fach workshops, he was quite often in close physical proximity to positive,

20 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
friendly discussions by other mathematicians concerning IUT, but he him-
self was never involved in discussions concerning IUT . This stance is entirely
consistent with his position (cf. the discussion of (Myst) in §1.3; [Rpt23])
of refusing to respond to numerous oﬀers on my part by e-mail to engage in
further discussions (via e-mail/Zoom or in person) concerning IUT.
§3. Lean, the EMSCOP, and IUT
In each of the various cases examined in detail in §2, the false or mislead-
ing assertions given in [Ctv] exhibit the common tendency of being more
oriented toward social/political dynamics — e.g., more sensationalist
and internet click/entertainment-oriented (cf. the discussion in §1.1, §1.3
of my conservative stance with regard to engagements with journalists) —
than toward the mathematical truth that underlies the topic under con-
sideration. In the past, I have responded to such situations by emphasizing
the importance of mathematical accountability and the passage of the
[EMSCOP] quoted in §1.1 (cf. also the discussion of §1.3). On the other
hand, there are practical limits with regard to enforceability and eﬃcacy
of this sort of “analog” approach. As discussed in [EssLgc], §1.12 (cf. also
§3.1 below), I also remain substantially skeptical about the practical eﬃcacy
of Lean-style computer formalization in the context of certain types of so-
cial/political issues. Nevertheless, I feel strongly about the fundamental
strategic importance of Lean-style computer formalization in the con-
text of the situation surrounding IUT (cf. §3.2 below) in the sense that,
while formalization might not result in any sort of complete and deﬁnitive
resolution of numerous social/political issues, it nonetheless represents the
(LbMth) best and perhaps the only technology available (either currently
or for the foreseeable future) for achieving meaningful progress with
regard to the fundamental goal of liberating mathematical truth
from the yoke of social/political dynamics .
It is precisely for this reason that, in addition to recent important mathemat-
ical research developments in IUT and related anabelian geometry, the topic
of Lean-style computer formalization has become an increasingly central
focus of research activities in the anabelian geometry community at RIMS
(Kyoto University) in recent years.
§3.1. Social/political dynamics versus mathematical truth. Al-
though Lean-style computer formalization seems to represent the best hope
that is currently available (cf. (LbMth)) for bridging the gap between the so-
cial/political dynamics surrounding social acceptance of mathemat-
ical (or, more generally, scientiﬁc) ideas and mathematical truth , it does
not appear at the present time to constitute any of sort of “magical cure”
for the complete resolution of social/political issues, especially in situations
where there are very strong undercurrents of “faith en masse” involved.
In this context, I am reminded of the (perhaps humorously anachronistic)
phenomenon of “ﬂat-earthers”, as well as the following stories that I heard
when I was a graduate student in the late 1980’s to early 1990’s at Princeton
University:

IUT REPORT (OCTOBER 2025) 21
· some local government in the United States of America passed a law
to the eﬀect that, within its local jurisdiction, π (i.e., the length of
the cirumference of a circle of unit radius) is equal to 3;
· some survey of the general population of the United States of Amer-
ica found that a surprising percentage of the population believe that
one-third is greater than one-half (i.e., “ 1
3 > 1
2 ”), that is to say, since
three is greater than two.
In either of these two cases, it seems highly unlikely that presenting a Lean-
style computer formalization of the irrationality of π or of the inequality
1
2 > 1
3 to the people involved would result in a change in the minds or hearts
of these people.
In some sense, this phenomenon is closely related to a more fundamental
and more scientiﬁc issue, namely, the issue discussed in [EssLgc], §1.12 (cf.,
especially, [EssLgc], Examples 1.10.1, 1.12.1) of the
(LnGp) potential gap between what is actually veriﬁed by a particular piece
of Lean code and the human interpretation/intentions that are at-
tached to the Lean code.
In fact, this issue in some sense plagues any kind of computer code — or,
more generally, any kind of technology — i.e., the fundamental issue of
(TecGp) whether or not the computer code/technology actually does what is
it is intended/supposed to do .
In this context, we recall that in [EssLgc], §1.12, the elementary example of
the Pythagorean theorem, i.e., “ x2 + y2 = z2” (where x ≤ y < z denote the
lengths of the sides of a right triangle), is discussed in detail (cf. [EssLgc],
Examples 1.10.1, 1.12.1). The main point of this discussion is that
(PyGp) it is diﬃcult to see how any sort of Lean-style computer formalization
of the truth of the Pythagorean theorem, i.e., “ x2 + y2 = z2”, can
yield any progress of a social/political nature in a situation where
there are very potent social/political dynamics in force, e.g., in the
form of a faith en masse , to the eﬀect that the Pythagorean theorem
states that “ x2 ·y2 = z2”, hence may be veriﬁed, e.g., by a Lean-style
computer formalization, to be false.
Of course, the logically appropriate interpretation of the simultaneous truth
of “ x2 + y2 = z2” and falsity of “ x2 · y2 = z2” is that the mathemati-
cal validity of “ x2 + y2 = z2” is logically unrelated to (i.e., in the sense
that this mathematical validity is not equivalent to and, moreover, does
not imply) the mathematical validity of “ x2 · y2 = z2”, but the point here
is that, depending on the social/political dynamics in force, this logically
appropriate interpretation can be suppressed by means of some sort of logi-
cally/technically absurd narrative , as described in (PyGp).
In some sense, the false assertions (F A1.3), (F A1.4)of [Ctv] discussed in
§2.1 amount to a conﬂation of this sort of purely social/political phenomenon
(i.e., as in (PyGp)) with a substantive mathematical issue . As discussed in
§2.1, in some sense, the most fundamental mathematical/logical tool that
can be applied in this sort of situation is the Existence Principle (ExPr)
discussed at the end of §2.1. On the other hand, it is by no means clear

22 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
whether or not even this Existence Principle has the power to penetrate the
faith en masse of quite substantial populations of people.
More generally (i.e., moving beyond the narrative framework of [Ctv]),
the whole situation surrounding the assertions of Scholze-Stix concerning
IUT constitutes a sort of textbook example of the phenomenon discussed in
(PyGp). As discussed in (Myst) (cf. also the discussion surrounding (Myst)
in §1.3; [Rpt23]),
(SSGp) repeated encouragements on my part to various mathematicians (i.e.,
not just to Scholze-Stix, but also to other mathematicians who in-
voke the assertions of Scholze-Stix), often involving references to
the [EMSCOP] passage cited in §1.1, to provide full details of the
precise statement and proof of any sort of assertion of a logical
relationship between the Scholze-Stix version of IUT (cf. (SSA2))
and the actual mathematical content of IUT have been met with
either refusals to respond to e-mails or blind declarations of
faith in Scholze-Stix, e.g., on the grounds that Scholze-Stix are “top
mathematicians”.
Often, in response to such blind declarations of faith , I have posed the fol-
lowing questions concerning the precise content of the person’s professed
faith:
(Fth1) Does your professed faith in Scholze-Stix consist of the belief that a
precise statement/complete proof as in (SSGp) already exists some-
where in explicit written form , preferably, in the form of a paper
published in an internationally recognized mathematical journal with
a functional peer review system ? If so, can you give me a precise
reference for this explicit written documentation of a precise state-
ment/complete proof as in (SSGp)?
(Fth2) If the answer to the ﬁrst query of (Fth1) is negative, then does your
professed faith in Scholze-Stix consist of the belief that the assertions
of Scholze-Stix should be granted — say, in the spirit of absolute
monarchism and the “divine right of kings” (cf. the discussion
of the ﬁnal portion of §1.3) — a priviledged status of unconditional
eternal absolute tautological mathematical validity , i.e., that
Scholze-Stix should be perennially exempt from any obligation
whatsoever to provide explicit written documentation as in (Fth1)?
I have yet to receive a meaningful sincere answer to either of these queries
(Fth1), (Fth2) from any mathematician who makes a blind declaration of
faith in the assertions of Scholze-Stix concerning IUT.
In this context, it should be recalled that the fact that Fermat is gener-
ally regarded as a “top mathematician ” of his day does not by any means
— e.g., by any invocation of the “divine right of kings” as in (Fth2)! —
imply that he did indeed have a rigorous mathematical proof of “Fermat’s
Last Theorem”. The history of mathematics is in fact replete with similar
examples that amply demonstrate the folly, as well as the deeply destruc-
tive eﬀect on the development of mathematics , of social/political dynamics
that bestow on any mathematician or mathematical assertion a priviledged
status of perennial exemption from any obligation whatsoever to provide

IUT REPORT (OCTOBER 2025) 23
precise, explicit written statements and proofs (as in (Fth1) or indeed the
[EMSCOP] passage cited in §1.1).
As was emphasized in the e-mails cited in [Rpt23], I ﬁnd it deeply puzzling
that, in the context of IUT, discussions (such as that of [Ctv], although
this phenomenon is, of course, by no means limited to [Ctv]!) tend to be
predicated on the narrative that there are two opposing sides involved.
That is to say, my understanding of the conceptual core of the discipline
of professional mathematics (cf. the [EMSCOP] passage cited in §1.1)
is that
(CmGl) explicit written documentation of precise statements and complete
proofs of mathematical assertions — and, hence, by extension, ulti-
mately, the Lean-style computer formalization of mathematical
assertions — is the common goal of all professional mathemati-
cians, that is to say, all professional mathematicians are supposed
to be ﬁghting on the same side , namely, in the context of IUT, to
achieve, ultimately, the complete Lean-style computer formalization
not only of the actual mathematical content of IUT proper (cf. the
discussion of §3.2 below), but also of all mathematical assertions by
other mathematicians concerning IUT in as timely and eﬃcient a
manner as is technically possible.
In this sense, so long as eﬀorts/progress is being made with regard to the
Lean-style computer formalization of IUT (cf. the discussion of §3.2 below),
it is by no means the case that the situation surrounding the assertions of
Scholze-Stix concerning IUT is “practically frozen ”, as is asserted in [Ctv],
p. 1CB/8.
In the context of the phenomenon discussed above in (LnGp), (TecGp),
(PyGp), (SSGp), despite the apparent possible lack of eﬃcacy of Lean-
style computer formalization in situations where this sort of phenomenon
occurs, it is important to emphasize that even in such situations, there
are nonetheless various ways in which Lean-style computer formalization
can play a meaningful role in certain social/political contexts . In the
remainder of the present §3.1, we would like to examine such aspects of
Lean-style computer formalization in more detail.
First of all, it should be emphasized that one fundamentally important
aspect of Lean-style computer formalization is the following:
(Asp1) Lean-style computer formalization yields a permanent, explicit
record of the logical structure of the mathematics involved that
operates completely independently of any human beings , i.e.,
such as the mathematicians whose work gave rise to the mathematics
involved; in particular, it continues to operate even after all math-
ematicians involved in the creation of the mathematics involved are
deceased, e.g., even at some time in the future when there no longer
exist any human beings who understand the mathematics involved .
This aspect (Asp1), combined with the important Existence Principle (ExPr),
are of fundamental importance for the sustained development of the dis-
cipline of professional mathematics in the very long-term (i.e., not just
decades, but centuries, etc.).

24 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
The second fundamentally important aspect of Lean-style computer for-
malization that we discuss — which is in fact closely related to (Asp1) — is
the following:
(Asp2) Lean-style computer formalization yields a sort of ideal, universal
colleague to address when writing/exposing mathematics; that is
to say, whereas directing activities in the writing/exposion of math-
ematics (i.e., such as writing papers, giving talks, etc.) toward other
colleagues in the traditional way, which is fundamentally predicated
on the existence of suitable colleagues , i.e., colleagues who have a
high degree of professional training and mathematical understand-
ing in the (often, for unavoidable technical reasons, very narrowly
deﬁned) relevant ﬁeld of expertise , Lean-style computer formaliza-
tion makes it possible for a mathematician to direct his eﬀorts when
writing/exposing mathematics toward a goal whose range of eﬃcacy
transcends any particular mathematical ﬁeld or social group-
ing in the mathematical community.
In the future (cf. the discussion in the ﬁnal portion of §1.2), combining
Lean-style computer formalization with artiﬁcial intelligence technology
may even make it possible to generate, simply by inputing Lean code into a
suitable artiﬁcial intelligence device ,
· expository textbooks,
· expository video talks , or even
· ChatGPT-style dialogue software that allows one to discuss and ask
technical questions
concerning the mathematics involved.
In the case of IUT, the original IUT papers [IUTchI, II, III, IV] were
written with the anabelian geometry community centered around (but
by no means limited to!) RIMS, i.e., the mathematical community in which
I had been active since the mid-1990’s, in mind. In particular, it should by
no means come as a surprise that this community has been able to engage
with IUT in a mathematically appropriate fashion, i.e., to achieve a rigorous
level of mathematical understanding of IUT and hence to conﬁrm the math-
ematical validity of IUT (cf. the discussion surrounding (AnDio1)). Here,
it should be noted that it is
(NwExp) entirely standard practice in professional mathematics for research
papers to be written with a rather narrowly deﬁned circle of
experts in mind.
It seems that some analytic number theorists , as well as some arithmetic
geometers who lie outside the school of anabelian geometry that centers
around (but is not limited to) RIMS, have taken issue with the fact that
the original IUT papers [IUTchI, II, III, IV] were written in a way that was
directed toward this narrowly deﬁned anabelian geometry community, but
the point that must be kept in mind is that this is entirely standard practice
(cf. (NwExp)) for a very simple technical reason :
(TcUnf) it is simply entirely technically unfeasible for every research
paper in mathematics to serve also as a complete, self-contained text-
book that contains pedagogical material that encapsulates the level

IUT REPORT (OCTOBER 2025) 25
of mathematical understanding that is usually obtained via a com-
plete graduate education and career as a professional mathematician
in some narrowly deﬁned technical ﬁeld of specialty.
Note, moreover, that quite intensive attempts over the years since the release
of the IUT papers in 2012 both on my part and on the part of other mathe-
maticians engaged with IUT via personal (e-mail/face-to-face) communica-
tions or workshops on IUT to engage with mathematicians from other ﬁelds
of number theory or arithmetic geometry concerning the topic of IUT have,
for the most part, not been successful. Thus, it is precisely for this reason
that the goal of Lean-style computer formalization constitutes the natural
(and indeed perhaps the only realistic) “next step” for making meaningful
progress with regard to the task of exposing/recording the mathematical con-
tent of IUT (cf. (Asp1), (Asp2), as well as the discussion of §3.2 below).
The discussion of (Asp2) leads naturally to the discussion of the following
ﬁnal two aspects of Lean-style computer formalization:
(Asp3) Once it becomes practical to generate textbooks, video talks, and
other expository material simply by inputing Lean code (cf. the
discussion following (Asp2)), one could imagine a fundamental revo-
lution of the business model underlying the employment prac-
tices of universities, whereby researchers in mathematics would
be liberated from (undesired) teaching duties (especially concerning
uninteresting elementary topics) in return for work devoted to Lean-
style computer formalization of mathematics in their ﬁeld.
(Asp4) The mathematical rigor that is essentially guaranteed by mathe-
matics that has undergone Lean-style computer formalization could
result in a fundamental revolution of the business model underly-
ing the hiring/promotion practices of universities, as well as
in peer review practices of mathematical journals , whereby
individuals — i.e., even, potentially, “complete amateurs”, who have
not received a formal education in mathematics — could be hired
for/promoted to high-ranking positions (such as professor, associate
professor, etc.) at universities or have their manuscripts published in
prestigious mathematical journals, not on the basis of traditional cri-
teria such as educational background, papers published, recommen-
dations by senior mathematicians, etc. — all of which can be very
strongly inﬂuenced by social/political dynamics — but rather on
the basis of Lean code that is submitted to the university or journal
in question.
Here, it is important to note that examples of the culture of basing hir-
ing/promotion practices not on traditional criteria such as educational back-
ground, papers published, recommendations by senior scholars, etc., but
rather simply on the computer code or device that an applicant submits
already exist in the information technology industry .
When taken as a whole, these last two aspects (Asp3), (Asp4) have the
potential, in the perhaps not so distant future, of paving the way to funda-
mentally revolutionizing the way in which mathematics departments
at universities operate. Another aspect of this revolution may be an increas-
ing shift to exclusively (or principally) online universities , such as the

26 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
recently established Zen University in Japan. In this context, it is interesting
to note that the Lean workshop held in July 2025 that was referred to in the
discussion of §1.2, §2.2 was held at the Zen Mathematics Center (ZMC),
an international research institute that was established at Zen University
“with the aim of promoting and developing modern mathematics with a fo-
cus on arithmetic geometry and the formalization of modern mathematics
using computer languages” .
§3.2. The fundamental importance of Lean in the context of IUT.
As was mentioned at the beginning of the present §3, in addition to re-
cent important mathematical research developments in IUT and related
anabelian geometry, the topic of Lean-style computer formalization, espe-
cially in the context of IUT, has become an increasingly central focus of
research activities in the anabelian geometry community at RIMS in recent
years. This state of aﬀairs is reﬂected, for instance, in the Lean workshop
in July 2025 in Tokyo, which focused on anabelian geometry and computer
formalization, and in which many members of the RIMS anabelian geome-
try community (including myself) participated. This state of aﬀairs is also
reﬂected in plans for a special year, to be held during the Japanese school
year April 2027 ∼ March 2028 on various aspects of arithmetic geometry, in
which both the mathematical content of IUT and related anabelian geometry
and the Lean-style formalization of anabelian geometry are included as im-
portant topics. This special year includes plans for an IUT workshop in the
spring of 2028, i.e., a sequel “IUT Summit 2028” to the IUT Summit 2025
held in March 2025, and it is expected that the Lean-style formalization of
IUT will also be one of the main topics covered at this workshop.
I have also been deeply impressed and encouraged by the entirely unan-
ticipated enthusiasm that has been exhibited in recent years by computer
scientists deeply involved with the development of Lean who are not mathe-
maticians, and whose work has no direct connections to arithmetic geometry
(hence, a fortiori , to IUT!), but who have expressed a keen interest in learn-
ing more about the situation surrounding IUT and, in particular, investigat-
ing what can be done with regard to pursuing the goal of Lean-style formal-
ization of IUT . Such computer scientists, despite being disconnected from
the mathematical community in a strict professional sense, nevertheless have
substantial personal interaction with professional mathematicians, and it is
through such personal connections that this enthusiasm was communicated
to me. Moreover, as a result of these ties between the Lean-development
community and the mathematical community, I have been invited to give
an online talk on the topic of Lean-style formalization of IUT at a workshop
on formalization that has been scheduled to be held in the spring of 2026 in
the United Kingdom.
In this context, we recall that, as discussed in detail in §2.2 (cf., especially,
(SGAIU)), there is absolutely no qualitative diﬀerence , at a founda-
tional level, between
· the use of universes/inter-universality phenomena in the classical
theory of ´ etale fundamental groupsdeveloped in SGA1 and
· the use of universes/inter-universality phenomena in IUT.

IUT REPORT (OCTOBER 2025) 27
It is for this reason that
(NoObs) the discussion, at the July 2025 Lean workshop in Tokyo, of the
recent Lean4 formalization of the SGA1 construction of the proﬁ-
nite fundamental group associated to a Galois category such as the
Galois category of ﬁnite ´ etale coverings of a connected scheme (cf.
the discussion of (DfUv1) in the ﬁnal portion of §2.2) convinced me
that, at least at a theoretical level (i.e., modulo the fact that it would
require quite a lot of work!), there should be no fundamental ob-
struction whatsover to the formalization of IUT via Lean 4 .
In the context of (NoObs), it is important to remember, however, that eﬀorts
toward the Lean-style formalization of IUT have only just begun in recent
years, and it will still probably take at least several more years of concerted
eﬀort before meaningful results, even relative to suitable “blackboxes”, can
be achieved (cf. the discussion of (LnCom), (MthFm), (BBxFm) below).
Indeed, it is perhaps useful to recall that, at least according to reports that
I have received, the Lean-style formalization of Wiles’ work on Fermat’s
Last Theorem has still, at the time of writing of the present report, not been
completed.
In the case of IUT, one particularly important aspect of Lean-style for-
malization lies in the following essentially self-evident observation :
(LnIm) When writing and executing Lean code, there is absolutely no need
to address such issues as the following:
(LnIm1) the issue of conforming to the tastes, either in writing style
or in terms of how the theory is developed , of particular senior
researchers in ﬁelds of number theory/arithmetic geometry that
are somewhat far removed from the sort of anabelian geometry
that is applied in IUT;
(LnIm2) the issue of responding to harsh criticism of the entirely el-
ementary nature of the essential logical structure underlying
IUT — as may be seen, for instance, in the ∧(∨)-chain that
forms the central topic of [EssLgc] — on the grounds that this
entirely elementary nature of central aspects of IUT is “incon-
ceivable” for a theory such as IUT that has highly nontrivial
diophantine consequences and, moreover, “deeply insulting” to
the intelligence/expertise of certain senior researchers.
That is to say, the writing and execution of Lean code is inherently
immune to these sorts of social/political issues that have substan-
tially obstructed the dissemination of IUT in the past.
Here, we note that (LnIm1) has, in the past, been particularly pernicious
in that it has often resulted in mathematicians who attempt to reformu-
late IUT in a way that conforms to their own personal tastes, only to
produce a fabricated version of IUT that is logically unrelated to IUT
in its original form (cf. the discussion of “logically unrelated fabricated ver-
sions” of IUT in [EssLgc], §1.8, §1.10, §1.11, §1.12) and (unlike IUT in its
original form) is entirely devoid of any meaningful mathematical content .
Such logically unrelated fabricated versions often result in a tremendous
amount of entirely unnecessary confusion concerning IUT. Of course,

28 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
the most central example of this phenomenon may be seen in the Scholze-
Stix manuscript (cf. (Myst)), but another notable example may be seen in
the preprints discussed in [Rpt24].
In the context of (LnIm), it is also interesting to note that,
(ImApx) relative to the property of immunity to the issues (LnIm1) and
(LnIm2) discussed in (LnIm), talented young researchers at elite uni-
versities — such as Emmanuel Lepage at the IMJ-PRG in France
or Yuichiro Hoshi and Shota Tsujimura at RIMS — who specialize
in topics in anabelian geometry that are closely related to IUT con-
stitute a far better approximation to Lean-formalization than
senior researchers in ﬁelds of number theory/arithmetic geometry
that are somewhat far removed from the sort of anabelian geometry
that is applied in IUT.
Moreover, in this context, it is important to observe that the overwhelming
heuristic validity of (ImApx) has been conﬁrmed countless times over
the years since the release of the IUT papers in 2012, despite the quite
harsh criticism and scornful condescension often heaped on the IUT-related
activities of such talented young researchers by senior researchers of the sort
mentioned in (LnIm), (ImApx).
From a practical point of view, in some sense, the main obstacle to Lean-
style formalization of IUT lies in the complete nonexistence (at the time
of writing of the present report) of professional mathematicians who are
equipped with both
· a thorough, rigorous mathematical understanding of the mathemati-
cal content of IUT and
· professional expertise in writing Lean code .
Thus,
(LnCom) the task of communicating the mathematical content of IUT to
mathematicians (such as arithmetic geometers) with professional ex-
pertise in writing Lean code is one important area of currently on-
going eﬀorts with regard to the goal of Lean-style formalization of
IUT.
Such eﬀorts, however, tend to be fraught with precisely the same dilem-
mas (cf. (LnIm1), (LnIm2)) that occur more generally with regard to the
dissemination of IUT to other mathematicians.
On the other hand, one can take a somewhat diﬀerent point of view with
regard to the goal of Lean-style formalization of IUT — a point of view
that is far less dependent on bridging the communication gap discussed in
(LnCom) — as follows. This point of view is the point of view that led to
the exposition of [EssLgc], §3, i.e., in particular, to the ∧(∨)-chain, which
forms the central topic of [EssLgc]. Here, we recall that this exposition of
[EssLgc], §3, consists of distilling the essential logical structure of IUT down
to the following central components :
· the coricity and symmetry/non-symmetry properties of the log-theta-
lattice (cf. [EssLgc], §3.1 ∼ §3.4);
· the formalism of descent (cf. [EssLgc], §3.9);

IUT REPORT (OCTOBER 2025) 29
· the actual descent procedure surrounding the multiradial represen-
tation of the theta-pilot (cf. [EssLgc], §3.10, (Stp1) ∼ (Stp3));
· the adjustment operations surrounding the holomorphic hull (cf.
[EssLgc], §3.10, (Stp4) ∼ (Stp6));
· the “ladder argument” consisting of a certain symmetrization proce-
dure to adjust for the log-shift in the 1-column (cf. [EssLgc], §3.10,
(Stp7) ∼ (Stp8)).
The central problem with this exposition of [EssLgc], §3, i.e., from the point
of view of the goal of Lean-style formalization of IUT, is that the exposition
in [EssLgc], §3, of these central components still contains quite a bit of non-
trivial anabelian geometry and, more generally, arithmetic geometry , which
acts as a sort of barrier from the point of view of mathematicians who lack
the necessary expertise in anabelian geometry. Thus, to summarize, one can
take the point of view that
(MthFm) the essential task that must be completed in order to expedite the
achievement of the goal of Lean-style formalization of IUT does not
lie primarily (or in any essential sense) in bridging the communica-
tion gap discussed in (LnCom), but rather in mathematically re-
formulating/formalizing the central components discussed above
in abstract, purely formal/combinatorial language that does
not contain any mathematical content from anabelian geometry (or
even arithmetic geometry) — i.e., in the style of the ∧(∨)-chain
of [EssLgc] or the notion of descent discussed in [EssLgc], §3.9 —
and hence may be readily understood by essentially any professional
mathematician or computer scientist who is comfortable with such
abstract, formal/combinatorial arguments .
In particular, the mathematical formalization discussed in (MthFm)
may be regarded as a sort of natural extension of the theory of [EssLgc], §3.
Alternatively, (cf. the discussion of and following (SymIUT) in [EssLgc],
§1.12; the discussion of [EssLgc], Example 3.10.2, (i))
(BBxFm) one may think of the mathematical formalization that is proposed
in (MthFm) as the task of reorganizing the mathematical content
of IUT into suitable blackboxes consisting of relatively straightfor-
ward, classical mathematical content in anabelian geometry (or, more
generally, arithmetic geometry) in such a way that the remaining
mathematical content of IUT, i.e., IUT regarded modulo those black-
boxes, consists solely of abstract, purely formal/combinatorial
arguments that may be readily understood by essentially any profes-
sional mathematician or computer scientist who is comfortable with
such abstract, formal/combinatorial arguments .
The development of a mathematical formalization of IUT as in (MthFm),
(BBxFm) is currently one of the central research topics of anabelian
geometers at RIMS. Also, it is hoped that such a mathematical formalization
of IUT, once completed, will also serve as a useful learning resource for
arithmetic geometers studying IUT.
Here, we note that the sort of reorganization proposed in (BBxFm) in
some sense goes in precisely the opposite direction to the way in which

30 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
mathematical papers are typically written (cf. (NwExp), (TcUnf)), i.e.,
for consumption primarily by experts in some narrowly deﬁned ﬁeld of spe-
cialty. Typically,
(BBxDD) it is very diﬃcult to write mathematical papers in the way proposed
in (BBxFm) since the reorganization into blackboxes of the sort
proposed in (BBxFm) can only come after a suﬃcient amount of time
has elapsed for the mathematical content under consideration to be
digested and distilled to the degree that this sort of reorganization
comes to seem very natural and can be achieved relatively painlessly.
This last observation (BBxDD) brings to mind the following historical obser-
vation. The sort of mathematical formalization of IUT proposed in (MthFm),
(BBxFm), taken together with the development over the years of expositions
of IUT such as [Alien] and [EssLgc], is, in some sense, reminiscent of the
development of class ﬁeld theory . That is to say, subsequent to the work
of Teiji Takagi on global class ﬁeld theory in the early 20th century, the
theory underwent various reformulations including the reformulation using
group cohomology by Emil Artin and John Tate, an approach that was also
applied to further develop local class ﬁeld theory . More recently, in the
1980’s, J¨ urgen Neukirch was involved in developing yet another approach to
formulating both local and global class ﬁeld theory that is based on a very
abstract, formal formulation of class ﬁeld theory and appears to have been
closely related to his work on anabelian topics such as the Neukirch-Uchida
Theorem. In this context, it is interesting to observe that, as was pointed
out by Ivan Fesenko, the local portion of this formulation of class ﬁeld the-
ory by Neukirch is reminiscent in various respects of the monoid-theoretic
way in which local class ﬁeld theory is applied in IUT.