ON THE VERIFICA TION OF INTER-UNIVERSAL
TEICHM ¨ULLER THEOR Y: A PROGRESS
REPOR T (AS OF DECEMBER 2013)
Shinichi Mochizuki(RIMS, Kyoto University, Professor)
ɹNearly a year and four months have elapsed since I released my series of papers
on inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory (IUTeich) in August 2012. In the following,
I would like to report on various developments that have come to pass during this
time with regard to the veriﬁcation of IUTeich.
(1) At the end of August 2012, I released my series of four papers concerning
IUTeich and submitted them to a mathematical journal. I have no intention of
disclosing the name of the journal or other information related to this journal
submission. The papers were released in order to make it possible forspecialists
to study and assess the validity of IUTeich; they werenever intended as an an-
nouncement to the general public. Moreover, I never envisaged that these papers
might elicitreactionsconsisting ofnon-mathematical contentfrom non-specialists.
Ih a v eno intentionof respondingto such non-mathematical reactions.
(2) As of the time of writing, I have giventwo talkson IUTeich atKyoto University
—i n
October 2010 (i.e., a one-hour “preview” talk) and
December 2012 (one hour)
—a n done talkon IUTeich at theUniversity of Tokyo—i n
June 2013 (one and a half hours).
The slides for these talks are available on my web site (on the page entitled “Travel
and Lectures”). It is likely that I will again give at least one talk at some academic
institution in Japan in 2014. The various talks that I have given so far cover
essentially the same content; this content is exposed in more detail in the survey
[Pano]. This survey is available on the page of my web site entitled “Papers” and
is scheduled to appear in the proceedings for the workshop at which my December
2012 talk was delivered.

2 ON THE VERIFICATION OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM ¨ULLER THEORY
(3) I have been conducting aseminar devoted to thedetailed examinationof IUTe-
ich withGo Yamashita(Research Fellow at Toyota Central Research and Devel-
opment Laboratories; Project Lecturer at the Center for Research Interaction in
Mathematical Sciences of RIMS, Kyoto University)
once a month (for 2 days≈ 12 hours), since October 2012.
More precisely, during the period
October ∼ December of 2012,
Yamashita studied the “preparatory papers” (i.e., [HASurI], [HASurII], [Semi-
Anbd], [FrdI], [FrdII], [EtTh], [AbsTopIII], [GenEll], etc.) and discussed their
contents with me in our seminar. During the periods
January ∼ March 2013 and
April ∼ September 2013,
he then proceeded toread throughthe entire “theory proper”constituted by the
fourpapers[IUTchI],[IUTchII],[IUTchIII],[IUTchIV]atotalof two times.D u r i n g
this period of roughly a year, I received from Yamashita, in writing (by e-mail),
numerousdetailed technical comments(roughly several hundred during this period
of a little over a year!) that exceed, by a substantial margin, the scope of a typical
referee’s report for a mathematical journal. After discussing these comments in our
seminar, I proceeded to correct the relevant papers and post the corrected versions
on the page of my web site entitled “Papers”. Also, around April 2013, Yamashita
prepared an “FAQ”, which I posted on my web site, to answer questions posed
by other researchers with whom he had occasion to interact at workshops and so
on. As a result of these two readings of the four papers, Yamashita acquired a
thorough understanding of the theory and, in particular, veriﬁed the correctness
of the theory, although, in his words, this veriﬁcation constituted, for him, only a
“single check”of the theory.
(4) Yamashita then proceeded to carry out, in his words, a“double check”of
IUTeich. This “double check” consisted of a seminar that was conducted
once a month (for 2∼ 3d a y s≈16 ∼ 24 hours), May∼ November 2013,
for the following three participants:
Akio Tamagawa(RIMS, Kyoto University, Professor)
Yuichiro Hoshi(RIMS, Kyoto University, Lecturer)
Makoto Matsumoto(Hiroshima University, Professor).
The seminar was conducted without my participation, in order to provide Yama-

ON THE VERIFICATION OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM ¨ULLER THEORY 3
shita with an opportunity to explain the theory in his own words and thereby
verify his understanding of the theory. Yamashita’s presentation of the theory in
this seminar consisted of literally wading through — from the most elementary
portion of the “preparatory papers” to the ﬁnal portion of the “theory proper” —
each Deﬁnition, Proposition, Theorem, etc. in the order written in these papers
— an approach that required quite a substantial amount of eﬀort on the part of
both the lecturer and the participants. When, either during the seminar or in the
course of preparing for it, technical comments or questions arose (roughly 10∼ 30
a month, on average), Yamashita and I discussed and resolved them the following
month in our monthly seminar. Toward the end of the (“double check”) seminar,
one participant made a remark to the eﬀect that, although it seemed likely that
it would take some time for him to digest the theory, he felt that he had more
or less reached an understanding of the general outline of the theory. Moreover,
the participants agreed that, from their present point of view, i.e., after having
seen Yamashita’s presentation of the theory, the content of the lectures and survey
discussed in (2) now seemed to be quite “appropriate”.
(5) Subsequent to the successful conclusion of the “double check” of (4), Yamashita
has started writing a detailedsurvey of IUTeich, i.e., which, in his words, will
constitute a “triple check”of the theory. He expects the survey to be about
200 ∼ 300 pages in length. Moreover, although his plans are not yet deﬁnite, he
is considering, at the request of Associate Professor Yuichiro Taguchi of Kyushu
University, giving a (several week long) intensive course on IUTeich at Kyushu
University, at some date subsequent to April 2014.
(6) Mohamed Sa¨ ıdi(University of Exeter (UK), Associate Professor) visited RIMS,
Kyoto University, as a Visiting Professor, for
the three month period of July∼ September 2013
during which I conducted aseminar with him devoted to thedetailed examination
of IUTeich from various points of view. This seminar consisted of
roughly 10 meetings (≈ 24 hours in all).
He also met with Yamashita a few times to discuss IUTeich. During a period
of a little over half a year prior to his visit, Sa¨ ıdi apparently ﬁnished reading
the “preparatory papers”, as well as roughly half of the “theory proper”. Upon
arrivingin Japan, he then ﬁnished readingthe “theory proper”. Duringhis visit, in
order to verify his understanding of the theory, he then proceeded to read through
the entire four papers of the “theory proper” once again. These two readings of
the “theory proper” were supplemented by the seminars that I conducted with

4 ON THE VERIFICATION OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM ¨ULLER THEORY
him, roughly once a week during his visit, in which we discussed the content of
the papers in quite substantial detail. During these seminars, he provided me with
numerousdetailed technical comments(roughly a hundred during the three months
of his visit!) that exceed, by a substantial margin, the scope of a typical referee’s
report for a mathematical journal. Just as in the case of Yamashita, after dis-
cussing these comments in our seminar, I proceeded to correct the relevant papers
and post the corrected versions on the page of my web site entitled “Papers”. In
conclusion, Sa¨ıdi stated to me, as well as, apparently, to at least one “third-party”
researcher outside Japan, that he believed the theory to be correct.
(7) Although both Yamashita and Sa¨ıdi are researchers in the ﬁeld of arithmetic
geometry, they nonetheless come from substantially diﬀerent mathematical back-
grounds, as may be veriﬁed by a brief look at their previous papers and other
work. One important attribute that they share, however, is theirproven track
record as referees, i.e., their wealth of experience in refereeing for mathematical
journals and, in particular, being in a position to judge the suitability of submitted
manuscripts for publication in such journals. On the other hand, in the case of
IUTeich, in light of both theimportance of the theoryand thenovelty of the ideas
that constitute the theory, it is desirable that the veriﬁcation process be conducted
with theutmost caution. In particular, the issue of whether or not one should re-
gard the veriﬁcation of IUTeich as being, for all practical purposes, complete, i.e.,
as a result of the activities of Yamashita and Sa¨ıdi, is by no means clear, and any
sort of “ﬁnal conclusion” on this topic must be regarded as a matter that lies be-
yond the scope of the present report. Nevertheless, such caveats notwithstanding,
it seems to me that the degree of meticulousness and attention to detail exhibited
in the veriﬁcation activities summarized above in (3), (4), (6) — which, as noted
above, exceed, by a substantial margin, the scope of a typical referee’s report for
a mathematical journal — together with the wealth of refereeing experience of
Yamashita and Sa¨ıdi (i.e., as discussed above) should be regarded as lendingquite
substantial weight to the extremely positive evaluationthat I received from both
of them in the course of these activities.
(8) One further important “by-product” of the veriﬁcation activities of Yamashita
and Sa¨ıdi concerning IUTeich is the fact that their experiences demonstrated, in
eﬀect, in a very explicit fashion, that, despite the quite substantial diﬀerences in
their mathematical backgrounds,
it is quitepossible to achieve areasonably rigorous understandingof the
theory within a period ofa little less than half a year.
Since there apparently exist researchers whose attempts to study IUTeich have not

ON THE VERIFICATION OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM ¨ULLER THEORY 5
proceeded so smoothly, I asked Yamashita and Sa¨ıdi on numerous occasions if they
had any “advice” for such researchers. Despite numerous discussions concerning
thistopic, theonly“advice”thatIwasabletoelicitfromthemconsistedofremarks
to the eﬀect that
if one proceeds to study carefully step by step, starting from the “prepara-
tory papers”, there is no reason that one should encounter any insur-
mountable diﬃculties.
On the other hand, the potential reader should keep the following point in mind:
ɾAlthough variouslimited portionsof IUTeich exhibit similarities to exist-
ing mathematical theories such as complex orp-adic Teichm¨uller theory
and the functional equation of the classical theta function, any attempt to
study IUTeich under the expectation that theessential thrustof IUTeich
will proceed via a similar pattern of argument to existing mathematical
theories is likely to end in failure.
BothYamashitaandSa¨ıdivoicedsimilaropinionsconcerningthispoint. Moreover,
over the past few years, I have frequently emphasized the following two points:
ɾAlthough many individuals appear to be interested mainly in the nu-
merical aspects of the inequality of the ABC Conjecture, in fact it is
more natural to regard thetheory that constitutesIUTeich as the main
object of interest. That is to say, theinequality of the ABC Conjecture
is best understood as simply being one barometer of the depth of the
mathematical content of the theory.
ɾTypically, a one-hour lecture — or, indeed, even a week-long exposition
of the theory — will be far from suﬃcient for most researchers to arrive
at a suﬃciently motivating appreciation of the essential framework that
underlies the theory. In particular, based on my past experiences, I
harbor substantial doubts that such short-term promotion activities can
lead to meaningful results. On the other hand, although the precise
amount of time necessary to arrive at a reasonable understanding of the
theory will no doubt vary from individual to individual, at least in the
case of researchers familiar with conventional arithmetic geometry, the
amount of time necessary should, as remarked above, be a matter of
months — i.e., roughlyhalf a yearor so —not a matter of years!
One aspect of my interaction with Sa¨ıdi that left a particularly strong impres-
sion on me was the fact that he voiced opinions similar in content to these last
two points as “independent observations”, i.e., without even the slightest bit of
prompting on my part!

6 ON THE VERIFICATION OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM ¨ULLER THEORY
(9) Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to express my deep gratitude to
Yamashita and Sa¨ıdi, as well as the participants of (4), for their exceptional and
zealous contributions to the goal of verifying IUTeich.

ON THE VERIFICATION OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM ¨ULLER THEORY 7
Bibliography
[HASurI] S. Mochizuki, A Survey of the Hodge-Arakelov Theory of Elliptic Curves I,
Arithmetic Fundamental Groups and Noncommutative Algebra, Proceedings
of Symposia in Pure Mathematics 70, American Mathematical Society (2002),
pp. 533-569.
[HASurII] S. Mochizuki, A Survey of the Hodge-Arakelov Theory of Elliptic Curves II,
Algebraic Geometry 2000, Azumino, Adv. Stud. Pure Math. 36, Math. Soc.
Japan (2002), pp. 81-114.
[SemiAnbd] S. Mochizuki, Semi-graphs of Anabelioids, Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci. 42
(2006), pp. 221-322.
[FrdI] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of Frobenioids I: The General Theory,Kyushu
J. Math. 62 (2008), pp. 293-400.
[FrdII] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of Frobenioids II: Poly-Frobenioids,Kyushu J.
Math. 62 (2008), pp. 401-460.
[EtTh] S. Mochizuki, The´Etale Theta Function and its Frobenioid-theoretic Mani-
festations, Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci.45 (2009), pp. 227-349.
[AbsTopIII] S. Mochizuki,Topics in Absolute Anabelian Geometry III: Global Reconstruc-
tion Algorithms, RIMS Preprint1626 (March 2008).
[GenEll] S.Mochizuki,ArithmeticEllipticCurvesinGeneralPosition, Math. J. Okayama
Univ. 52 (2010), pp. 1-28.
[IUTchI] S. Mochizuki, Inter-universal Teichm¨uller Theory I: Construction of Hodge
Theaters, RIMS Preprint1756 (August 2012).
[IUTchII] S.Mochizuki, Inter-universal Teichm¨uller Theory II: Hodge-Arakelov-theoretic
Evaluation, RIMS Preprint1757 (August 2012).
[IUTchIII] S. Mochizuki,Inter-universal Teichm¨uller Theory III: Canonical Splittings of
the Log-theta-lattice, RIMS Preprint1758 (August 2012).
[IUTchIV] S. Mochizuki,Inter-universal Teichm¨uller Theory IV: Log-volume Computa-
tions and Set-theoretic Foundations, RIMS Preprint1759 (August 2012).
[Pano] S. Mochizuki, A Panoramic Overview of Inter-universal Teichm¨uller The-
ory, RIMS Preprint 1774 (February 2013), to appear inRIMS K¯oky¯uroku
Bessatsu.