SEMI-POSITIVITY AND FROBENIUS CRYSTALS
On Semi-Positivity and Filtered Frobenius Crystals
by Shinichi MOCHIZUKI*
§0. Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to prove that certain subquotients of the MF∇ -objects
of Faltings ([1]) are semi-positive. In particular, we obtain an algebraic proof of a result
(generalizing those of [5], [9]) on the semi-positivity of the higher direct images of certain
kinds of sheaves for semistable families of algebraic varieties. Our Main Theorem, proven
in §3, is as follows:
Theorem 3.4: Let f :( X,E ) → (S, D) be a semistable family of varieties of relative
dimension d,w i t h S a smooth, proper scheme over a ﬁeld L of characteristic zero. Let
(A, ∇
A,F i(A)) be a globally crystalline ﬁltered vector bundle with connection on (X,E ).
Then for any nonnegative integer α, the coherent sheaf of OS -modules
Rαf∗(ωX/S ⊗OX (A/F1(A))∨)
is a semi-positive vector bundle, as are all of its tensor powers.
(The term “semistable” (respectively, “globally crystalline”) is deﬁned in §1 (respectively,
§3).) In particular, this Theorem implies the following:
Corollary 3.5: Let f :( X,E ) → (S, D) be as above. Then for any nonnegative
integer α, the coherent sheaf of OS -modules
f∗((Ωlog
X/S)α)
is a semi-positive vector bundle, as are all of its tensor powers.
Thus, Fujita and Kawamata proved the above Corollary in the caseα = d.
Received February 24, 1994. Revised July 20, 1994.
1991 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation: 14F30
* Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606, Japan
1

Roughly speaking, the idea of the proof is as follows. We restrict to a curve, and
consider the possibility of quotients of the bundle in question that have negative degree. If
such a quotient did exist, it would mean that we could construct a large number of sections
of a space of bounded dimension. This concludes the proof.
Since the proof is substantially simpler and less high-powered in the case when the
ﬁbres of f,a sw e l la st h eb a s eS, are one-dimensional and the ﬁltered vector bundle
is trivial, we present the proof in that special case in an Appendix (which is logically
independent of the rest of the paper, except for basic facts and deﬁnitions given in§1). We
believe that this special case sheds light on the general case. In essence, what makes the
proof easier in this case is the fact that we have a very physical and concrete realization
of 1-motives and Hodge theory (for trivial coeﬃcients), namely, the theory of semiabelian
schemes and the Picard group. It is the lack of such explicit tools in the higher-dimensional
case with nontrivial coeﬃcients that requires one, if one is to carry out an analogous proof,
to employ more abstract tools.
In [7], Illusie has proven similar results using essentially equivalent techniques to our
own, although from a somewhat diﬀerent point of view. Namely, Illusie works modulo p,
and obtains the following result:
Theorem : (given as Remark 4.18 in [7]) If f :( X,E ) → (S, D) is as in Theorem
3.4, and L is an ample line bundle on S, then for all i ≥ 1,j ≥ 0,w eh a v e :
H
i(S, L⊗ Rjf∗(ωX/L)) = 0.
(In fact, as was pointed out to the author by the referee, such vanishing results can also be
proven by the same technique as that used in [2] to prove the Kodaira Vanishing Theorem.)
When the base S is projective, then Kollar (in [10]) shows how to pass from a vanishing
result such as the result of Illusie just quoted to a semi-positivity result such as the one
given in Theorem 3.4. On the other hand, if a vector bundle E on S is found to be semi-
positive, and L is an ample line bundle on S,t h e nF = E⊗
OS L forms an ample vector
bundle on S. It is not diﬃcult to see that if one applies Kodaira vanishing to the bundle
O(1) on the projective bundle P → S associated to F, one then gets a vanishing result
similar to the above quoted result of Illusie, but somewhat weaker. Moreover, whenS is a
curve, it follows immediately from Serre duality that Theorem 3.4 (for the case of trivial
coeﬃcients) is equivalent to the vanishing result of Illusie. However, in the case of higher
dimensional S, especially, when S is not projective, it is not clear to the author what the
precise relationship is between Illusie’s result quoted above and Theorem 3.4.
The author would like to express his gratitude to Prof. B. Mazur for reading over a
preliminary draft of this paper and informing him of the above mentioned paper of Illusie;
and to Profs. J. Harris, D. Abramovich, L. Illusie, and the referee for their comments and
for pointing out some errors in early versions of this paper. Finally, we thank Prof. A.
Ogus for suggesting a signiﬁcant simpliﬁcation of the original argument.
2

§1. Basic Algebraic Lemmas
Let A be a regular noetherian ring. Let X, S be smooth, proper schemes over A,a n d
let D ⊆ S, E ⊆ X be relative divisors with normal crossings over A.L e t f : X → S
be a morphism which is smooth over S − D, and such that (schematically) E = f −1(D).
Note that these assumptions together imply thatf is, in fact, smooth in codimension one.
To simplify things, we also assume thatf has geometrically connected ﬁbres and constant
relative dimension. Then, using the terminology of log schemes as given in [8], we make
the following
Deﬁnition 1.1: We say that (f : X → S;E;D) (or just f : X → S, for short) is a
semistable family of varieties(or just semistable for short) if, when we give X (respectively,
S) the log structure arising from the divisor with normal crossings E (respectively, D), the
morphism of log schemes induced by f is log-smooth.
If f : X → S is semistable, then we denote the relative sheaf of logarithmic diﬀerentials by
Ω
log
X/S. If the relative dimension of f is d, then we denote the dth exterior power of Ωlog
X/S
by ωX/S. Note that ωX/S is the relative canonical sheaf ofX over S in the sense of duality
theory.
Proposition 1.2: Suppose that A is an algebraically closed ﬁeld, that S is one-
dimensional (i.e., a curve), and that L is an ample line bundle on S. Then for any N ∈ N,
there exists a ﬁnite, ﬂat morphism π : T → S which has the following properties:
(1) T is a smooth, proper, connected A-scheme;
(2) the ramiﬁcation divisor R ⊆ S of π avoids D
(3) dimAH0(T, LT ) ≥ N .
Proof: This is the standard technique of passing to a ramiﬁed cyclic covering, used, for
instance, in algebraic proofs of the Kodaira Vanishing Theorem (see [2]). Namely, one
takes a very high tensor power of L,s a yM = L
⊗M (where we take M to be very large,
and invertible in A), such that M is very ample. Then there exists a section σ of M
over S whose zero divisor is ´etale over A and avoids D. Then taking the cyclic covering
of S′ given by extracting an Mth root of σ gives us a scheme T as above such that the
dimension of the space of sections overT of L is one greater than it was before. Repeating
this process gives the inequality desired. ⃝
Let us go back to assuming thatA is arbitrary regular noetherian ring. We now review
some basic well-known facts about blow-ups. Suppose that we are given aA-ﬂat subscheme
3

F ⊆ S. Let us say that F is ﬂatly positioned (respectively, transversely positioned) with
respect to the divisor with normal crossingsD if for any ´etale morphism U → S such that
D|U splits into a union of smooth components, the schematic intersection of F |U with
any irreducible component of D|U is ﬂat over A (respectively, and the restriction to any
connected component I ⊆ F |U of F |U of the union of irreducible components of D|U that
do not contain I is a relative divisor with normal crossings on I).
Lemma 1.3 : Let us suppose that A is a domain, and that we are given a section
σ : Spec(A) → S whose image is ﬂatly positioned with respect to D.L e t π : ˜S → S be
the blow-up of S at the image of σ.T h e n ˜S is smooth over A,a n d ˜D = π−1(D)red ⊆ ˜S is
a relative divisor with normal crossings over A.
Proof: Indeed, it suﬃces to take local coordinates x0,x1,... ,xn for S over A at some
point in the image of σ such that the image of σ is deﬁned by the ideal generated by the
x’s, and D is deﬁned by some product of thex’s. The result follows by direct computation.
⃝
Lemma 1.4 : Suppose that A is an algebraically closed ﬁeld, and that we are
given an A-smooth curve (i.e., an A-smooth, closed subscheme of dimension one) C ⊆ S.
Then, after applying a series of blow-ups of S at closed points, we can obtain a birational
morphism π : ˜S → S such that if ˜C is the strict transform of C in ˜S,a n d ˜D = π−1(D)red ,
then ˜C is transversely positioned with respect to ˜D.
Proof: Clearly we can assume (by using ´etale localization) that D splits into a union of
smooth divisors: D = ⋃ Di. Now we claim that after a series of blow-ups, we may assume
that each Di either contains C or intersects C transversely. Indeed, if Di intersects C
at a point with multiplicity r, then a simple calculation reveals that after blowing up at
that point, the strict transform ofDi intersects the strict transform ofC with multiplicity
≤ r−1, while the exceptional divisor intersectsC transversely. Thus, repeating this process
proves the claim.
Thus, we assume that each Di either contains C or intersects C transversely. For
simplicity, by localizing, we can also assume thatC fails to be transversely positioned with
respect to D at only one point. With these assumptions, the only thing that could keepC
from being transversely positioned is if two or more distinct Di’s intersect C transversely
at the same point. If this happens, then let us blow up the point. It is then easy to see that
the strict transforms of those D
i’s do not meet the strict transform of C. This completes
the proof. ⃝
Now let us go back to assuming thatA is a regular noetherian ring. Let us suppose that
C is a smooth, geometrically connected curve over A which is embedded as a transversely
positioned closed subscheme C ⊆ S with respect to the divisor D. Let us denote by Slog
the log scheme (see [8] for details) obtained by putting on S the log structure associated
4

to the divisor with normal crossingsD.L e tCvir be the log scheme obtained by placing on
C the log structure obtained by pulling back the log structure of Slog to C. (Here “vir”
stands for virtual, since the log structure involves “virtual divisors” that don’t really exist
on C.) Finally, let Cphs be the log scheme obtained by putting on C the log structure
obtained ´etale locally on C by restricting to C only the components of D that do not
contain C. (Here “phs” stands for “physical” since the log structure arises from actual
“physical” divisors on C.) Thus, we have natural morphisms of log schemes Cvir → Slog,
and ν : Cvir → Cphs. Note that ν induces, via pull-back, a locally split morphism of
vector bundles ν∗ :Ω Cphs/A → ΩCvir /A on C; let us denote the cokernel vector bundle by
ResCvir /A. Thus, intuitively speaking, ResCvir /A corresponds to the residues with respect
to the components of D that contain C. It is easy to see that ResCvir /A becomes trivial
after pull-back to some ﬁnite ´etale morphism G → C. Indeed, one need merely take a
covering G → C on which the ´etale local system of “smooth irreducible components of D
that contain C” splits. On such a G, one then obtains a global (i.e., over all of G)b a s i s
for ResCvir /A by considering the logarithmic diﬀerentials of functions deﬁning the various
smooth irreducible components. Thus, in the future, often it will be convenient to assume,
in this situation, that Res
Cvir /A already is trivial, and it is always possible to assume this
by replacing C by the ﬁnite ´etale cover G.
§2. Faltings’ Extension of Fontaine-Laﬀaille Theory
In this Section, we review the deﬁnition of Faltings’ category MF∇
[a,b](S◦) of “loga-
rithmic crystalline ﬁltered vector bundles with Frobenius action,” and study certain func-
toriality properties of this category which are not mentioned in [1]. In this Section and
throughout the rest of the paper (except the Appendix), we adopt the following conven-
tions: k is a ﬁnite ﬁeld with q = p
n elements, A = W(k) (the ring of Witt vectors with
residue ﬁeld k), and 0 <d i mA(S) ≤ dimA(X) ≤ p − 2( w h e r edimA(S)i st h er e l a t i v e
dimension of S over A).
Let us choose an aﬃne open U ⊆ S,w i t hU = Spec(R). Let us suppose that we are
given an A-semilinear (i.e., with respect to the natural Frobenius on A) endomorphism
Φ: ˆR → ˆR of the p-adic completion ˆR of R that lifts the Frobenius on R/pR and ﬁxes
the divisor D ⊆ S.L e t a, b ∈ N with a ≤ b and b − a ≤ p − 1. Then by deﬁnition ([1],
II, c)) an object of MF∇
[a,b](R◦) consists of the data of a collection of ﬁnitely generated
p-torsion R-modules M, Fi(M)( f o ra l li ∈ Z), together with an integrable logarithmic
connection ∇ : M → M ⊗R Ωlog
R/A, plus locally splitR-linear injections Fi+1(M) → Fi(M),
Fi(M) → M,a n dR-linear morphisms φi : Fi(M) ⊗ ˆR,Φ
ˆR → M that satisfy the following
axioms:
(1) the composite ofFi+1(M) → Fi(M)w i t hFi(M) → M is the morphism
Fi+1(M) → M;
(2) the morphism Fi(M) → M is an isomorphism if i ≤ a; Fi(M)=0i f
i>b ;
5

(3) if we let ˜M be the inductive limit of the diagram:
... → Fi+1(M) ← Fi+1(M) → Fi(M) ← Fi(M) → Fi−1(M) ← ...
where the right arrows are the morphisms in the deﬁnition and the
left arrows are multiplication by p, then we assume that the φi in-
duce an isomorphism φ : ˜M ⊗ ˆR,Φ
ˆR → M; (thus, here we require that
φi−1|Fi(M) = pφi;)
(4) the connection ∇ satisﬁes Griﬃths transversality , i.e., ∇(Fi(M)) ⊆
Fi−1(M) ⊗R Ωlog
R/A;
(5) the isomorphism φ : ˜M ⊗ ˆR,Φ
ˆR → M are parallel with respect to the
connection ∇ on M, and the connection naturally induced by ∇ on
˜M ⊗ ˆR,Φ
ˆR (as in [1], §2).
Although this local deﬁnition depends on the choice of our Frobenius lifting Φ, it is possible
to prove ([1], Theorem 2.3 – which holds since we are assuming thatp> 2) that for any two
choices of Φ, there is a canonical isomorphism between the two resulting MF∇
[a,b](R◦)’s.
Thus, we can glue these local categories together and thus obtain a global category, which
is denoted MF∇
[a,b](S◦).
One natural way to obtain objects inMF∇
[a,b](S◦) is by taking the higher direct image
sheaves with respect to f ◦
cr of logarithmic crystals on X. Indeed, we may rephrase this
statement in greater detail as follows. Let E be an object of MF∇
[0,a](X◦). Now by
regarding X and S as being endowed with logarithmic structures arising from the divisors
E and D, we may consider (following [8], §4) the relative crystalline sites of X and S
(with their respective log structures) over A.S i n c eE is endowed, in particular, with a
connection, it deﬁnes a crystal on the relative crystalline site of X◦ over A. Thus, we can
take the higher direct image sheaves Ri(f ◦
cr)∗E with respect to the morphism of topoi f ◦
cr
from the logarithmic crystalline site of X to that of S. It is then a result of [1], Theorem
6.2, that these higher direct imagesRi(f ◦
cr)∗E come with a natural ﬁltration and Frobenius
action in such a way that we may regard Ri(f ◦
cr)∗E as being an object of MF∇
[0,a+i](S◦),
as long as max(a + d, a+ i) ≤ p − 2. A typical example is the case where E is taken to be
OXn = OX ⊗Zp Z/pnZ (with the obvious “trivial” ﬁltration, connection, and Frobenius
action), and a =0 .
Later, following a suggestion of Ogus (to simplify the original proof) we will make use
of the following:
Lemma 2.1 : Let (M,F i(M), ∇,φi) be an object of MF∇
[0,a](S◦),w h e r eS is
smooth and proper, and a ≤ p − 2. Then every element of H0(S, M/F1(M)) lifts to a
horizontal element of H0(S, M).
6

Proof: This follows from the degeneration of the Hodge spectral sequence ([1], Theorem
4.1). ⃝
This completes our review of the deﬁnition of MF∇
[a,b](S◦). We now wish to discuss
certain functoriality properties of the category MF∇
[a,b]. Let us assume that we are given
an A-smooth closed, one-dimensional subscheme C ⊆ S which is transversely positioned
(see §1 for a deﬁnition) with respect to D.L e t F ⊆ C be the divisor (necessarily ´etale
over A) obtained by restricting to C the irreducible components of D that do not contain
C. (In fact, these irreducible components may only exist after ´ etale localization, so one
may need to apply ´etale descent to construct F, but this is no problem.) With the choice
of divisor F ⊆ C, we may consider the category MF∇
[a,b](C◦). We wish to construct a
restriction functor
ρ: MF∇
[a,b](S◦) →M F ∇
[a,b](C◦)
as follows. Clearly, we can use ´etale descent, and thus assume that S = Spec(R), C =
Spec(T)a n dt h a tD splits as a union of smooth divisors. Also, we use the notation of “vir”
and “phs” to denote the various log structures on C deﬁned at the end of §1. We start
with R-modules M, Fi(M), together with various split injections among these modules
and an integrable logarithmic connection∇ : M → M ⊗R Ωlog
R/A. These restrict to modules
MC, Fi(M)C, along with various split injections and an integrable logarithmic connection
∇vir
C : MC → MC ⊗T Ωlog
Cvir /A. Of course, ideally, we would like an object with connection
on the log schemeCphs,n o tCvir. To obtain such an object we reason as follows. First, by
(ﬁnite) ´etale descent, we assume that ResCvir /A is a trivial vector bundle, and we choose
a basis of generating sections of ResCvir /A over C each of which is locally obtained as the
logarithmic diﬀerential of a function deﬁning a smooth irreducible component ofD,a n dw e
let s1,... ,sr be the corresponding basis of the dual vector bundleRes∨
Cvir /A. By applying
∇vir
C to each of the si, we obtain a collection of commuting (because of the integrability
of ∇) OC-linear endomorphisms Ni : MC → MC,f o ri =1 ,... ,r . Moreover, since they
represent the monodromy of an object ofMF∇
[a,b],t h eNi are necessarily nilpotent. Indeed,
to see this, we reason as follows: Let N be one of the Ni’s. Note that there exists (by
condition (3) above) a “Verschiebung” morphismV : M → M ⊗ ˆR,Φ
ˆR such thatφa ◦V = pj
and V ◦φa = pj,w h e r ej
def
= b − a. Thus, (by condition (5) above) Nj = φa ◦Nj ◦V ,
so N2j = pj · φa ◦N2j ◦V . Thus, by recursion, N2j = 0. This proves that the Ni are
nilpotent.
Thus, the Ni deﬁne a ﬁltration with r indices, which we call themonodromy ﬁltration
on MC, and which we denote by:
μi1,...,iα ,...,ir (MC)= Ker(Ni1
1 ... Niα
α ... Nir
r )
Now let Grμ(MC) denote the graded object associated to the monodromy ﬁltration. It is
clear that the ﬁltration Fi(M)C deﬁnes a natural ﬁltration Fi(Grμ(MC)) on Grμ(MC),
7

and that ∇vir
C induces a connection ∇gr : Grμ(MC) → Grμ(MC) ⊗T Ωlog
Cphs/A, as desired.
It is easy to see that ( Grμ(MC),F i(Grμ(MC)), ∇gr) satisfy all the necessary axioms for
an object of MF∇
[a,b](C◦), and all that remains to do in deﬁning ρ is the construction of
the Frobenius action on Grμ(MC).
First of all, because of our assumption that C is transversely positioned, one sees
easily that (after possible further ´etale localization) it is possible to choose a Frobenius
lifting Φ : ˆR → ˆR that not only ﬁxes D, but also ﬁxes C (and F). Thus, Φ restricts to a
Frobenius lifting ΦC : ˆT → ˆT, so that tensoringφ over R with T (via the natural projection
R → T) gives an isomorphism φC : ˜MC ⊗T,ΦC T ∼= ( ˜M ⊗R,Φ R) ⊗R T → MC. Since this
Frobenius action onMC clearly commutes with theNi, it follows that the Frobenius action
on MC induces a Frobenius action onGrμ(MC). One checks easily that the Frobenius that
we obtain on Grμ(MC) is independent of the choice of Φ (as long as we deal with Φ that
ﬁx C and D): indeed, the morphism α constructed in the proof of [1], Theorem 2.3, is
easily seen to commute with restriction toC. Finally, it is easy to check that this Frobenius
action satisﬁes all the remaining properties in the deﬁnition of the categoryMF∇ : Indeed,
this follows from using the fact that MF (i.e., the category of [1], §2, that is similar to
MF∇ , but lacks the datum of a connection) isabelian ([1], Theorem 2.1, Corollary). This
completes the deﬁnition of the functor ρ.
Now we wish to note that functoriality also holds for blow-ups π : ˜S → S at a
section σ : Spec(A) → S which is ﬂatly positioned. The procedure is the same as in the
previous paragraph: one pulls back the necessary modules, morphisms, and connection in
the obvious fashion; the only trick is pulling back the Frobenius action. The key is to note
that since σ is ﬂatly positioned, one can choose the Frobenius lifting Φ : ˆR → ˆR in such a
way that not only D, but also σ is ﬁxed by Φ. It is then easy to see that the Frobenius
action on ˆR extends to a Frobenius action on the p-adic completion of ˜S in such a way
as to be functorial with respect to π. It remains to check that π
∗ is independent of the
choice of Frobenius lifting Φ. But the only thing which is unclear is whether or not the
Frobenius action depends on Φ, and this follows from restricting to a dense open subset of
S over which π is an isomorphism. Thus, we see that we get a natural functor
π
∗ : MF∇
[a,b](S◦) →M F ∇
[a,b](( ˜S)◦)
as desired.
Now let C → Spec(A) be a proper, smooth curve, with geometrically connected
ﬁbres, and let F ⊆ C be an ´etale divisor over A. Let us suppose that we are given a ﬁnite
morphism ψ : C → S. Then we shall say that ψ is admissibly factorizable if it factors into
the composite of the following form:
(1) we have a morphism ψ1 : ˜S → S, which is the composite of a sequence
of blow-ups at A-sections that are ﬂatly positioned over A;l e t ˜D =
ψ−1
1 (D)red;
8

(2) for some C′ → Spec(A) (also a smooth curve with geometrically con-
nected ﬁbres) and some F ′ ⊆ C′ (an ´etale divisor over A), we have a
closed immersion ψ2 : C′ ↪→ ˜S such that C′ is transversely positioned
with respect to ˜D,a n dF ′ is the restriction to C′ of the components of
˜D that do not contain C′; we also assume that C′ is not contained in
any of the exceptional divisors of the morphism ψ1;
(3) we have a morphism ψ3 : C → C′ such that ψ−1
3 (F ′)red ⊆ F and ψ3 is
´etale outside of F with tame ramiﬁcation at F;
so that ψ = ψ1 ◦ψ2 ◦ψ3.
Let us suppose that ψ is admissibly factorizable. Then by the functoriality consider-
ations reviewed above, it is clear that by composition we obtain a functor
ψ∗ : MF∇
[a,b](S◦) →M F ∇
[a,b](C◦)
(Indeed, only for morphisms like ψ3 did we not discuss functoriality; but functoriality for
morphisms of this type is the most obvious.) It remains to see thatψ∗ is independent of the
factorization ψ = ψ1 ◦ψ2 ◦ψ3. This is clear for all the data involved except (perhaps) for
the Frobenius action and the formation ofGrμ(−); but this follows, as usual, by restricting
to the open dense subsetC −F, where the fact that the Frobenius action and the formation
of Grμ(−) are independent of the factorization is clear. We thus summarize our ﬁndings
in the following
Proposition 2.2: For all admissibly factorizable morphisms ψ :( C,F ) → (S, D),
we have a canonical functor
ψ∗ : MF∇
[a,b](S◦) →M F ∇
[a,b](C◦)
for all b − a ≤ p − 1.
§3. The Main Theorem
Before stating and proving the Main Theorem of this paper, we need to introduce
some new deﬁnitions. Unfortunately, these deﬁnitions are somewhat ad hoc, but at least
they allow us to prove a theorem with a somewhat broader range of applicability than
previous statements of such results (as given in [5], [9]).
Let L be a ﬁeld of characteristic zero. Let X be a proper, smooth L-scheme; E ⊆ X
a divisor with normal crossings. Fix a ∈ N. Let us suppose that we are given a vector
bundle A on X together with a ﬁltration F
a(A) ⊆ Fa−1(A) ⊆ ... F1(A) ⊆ F0(A)= A
9

by subbundles such that all the inclusions are locally split, and a connection ∇ A with
logarithmic poles at E. Then we make the following
Deﬁnition 3.1: (i) Suppose that L is a number ﬁeld (i.e., a ﬁnite extension of Q).
Let OL be its ring of integers. Then for some positive rational integer N , the objects X,
E, A,a n d ∇ A are deﬁned over R
def
= OL[N −1] and satisfy the same hypotheses as they
did over L (i.e. being proper and smooth, being a relative divisor with normal crossings,
being a vector bundle, being a locally split inclusion, being a connection with logarithmic
poles at E, etc.). Let us ﬁx such models X
R, ER, AR,a n d (∇ A)R over R, and denote by
means of a subscript the result of base-changing these objects from R to some R-algebra.
Then we shall say that (A, ∇ A,F i(A)) is globally crystalline if for almost all primes ℘ of
L, when we base-change from R to the completion A℘ of OL (the ring of integers) at ℘,t h e
resulting ﬁltered vector bundle with connection arises from an inverse system of objects
{A℘,n }n∈N (where A℘,n is ﬂat over Z/pnZ)o f MF∇
[0,a](X◦
A℘ ).
(ii) If L is any ﬁeld (of characteristic zero), then we say that (A, ∇ A,F i(A)) is globally
crystalline if there is a ﬁnitely generated Q-subalgebra R ⊆ L over which X, E, A, ∇ A,
and the Fi(A) are deﬁned and satisfy the same hypotheses as they did over L (i.e. being
proper and smooth, being a relative divisor with normal crossings, being a vector bundle,
being a locally split inclusion, being a connection with logarithmic poles at E,e t c . ) s u c h
that at all closed points of Spec(R) (whose residue ﬁelds are necessarily number ﬁelds),
the restricted ﬁltered vector bundle is globally crystalline (as in (i)).
Note that if (A, ∇
A,F i(A)) is globally crystalline, then the OX-dual of A,w h i c hw e
denote by A∨, endowed with the dual ﬁltration (shifted overa places) and connection, gives
rise to a ﬁltered vector bundle with connection (A∨, ∇ A∨ ,F i(A∨)) which is again globally
crystalline. Continuing with our ﬁeld L of characteristic zero, suppose that X is proper
and geometrically connected, and that we are also given a smooth, proper, geometrically
connected L-scheme S and a divisor with normal crossings D ⊆ S, plus a morphism
f :( X,E ) → (S, D) which is semistable in the sense of Deﬁnition 1.1.
Lemma 3.2 : We denote by d the relative dimension of X over S. Suppose that
(A, ∇
A,F i(A)) is globally crystalline. Then for any i ≥ 0, the de Rham cohomology
Rd−i(f ◦
DR)∗(A, ∇ A), together with the Gauss-Manin connection, and the Hodge ﬁltration
(induced by Fi(A)) constitute a globally crystalline object on (S, D).L e t (B, ∇ B,F i(B))
be the dual object to this crystalline object on (S, D). Then,
(B/F1(B))∨ = Rif∗(ωX/S ⊗OX (A/F1(A))∨)
Proof: This follows from [1], Theorem 6.2, and Grothendieck-Serre duality applied to
the morphism f (for which ωX/S is the dualizing sheaf). ⃝
10

Lemma 3.3 : Assume that L is algebraically closed. Suppose that we have
a vector bundle with connection (A, ∇ A) on a X with logarithmic poles at E.T h e n
dimL H0
DR(X, A) ≤ rank(A), where by the subscript “ DR,” we mean the horizontal
global sections.
Proof: By formal integration using the connection, and the fact that in characteristic
zero, the exterior derivative vanishes only on constant functions, it follows that a horizontal
global section is determined by its value at a single point. ⃝
We now review some basic deﬁnitions about semi-positivity from [5]. Let V be a
projective variety over a ﬁeld L. Then a line bundle L on V is semi-positive if for any
ﬁnite morphism g : C → V ,w h e r eC is a smooth, projective curve, the degree of g∗L is
nonnegative. If E is a vector bundle on V ,t h e nE is semi-positive if the O(1)-bundle on
PV (E) is semi-positive. It follows immediately from the deﬁnitions that ifE is semi-positive
and L is an ample line bundle, then E⊗ OV L is an ample vector bundle on V .
We are now ready to state the Main Theorem of this paper. Various forms of this
theorem were proven previously by Fujita ([5]) and Kawamata ([9]). Moreover, as Viehweg
remarks in [11],§1.21, the techniques of J. Kollar, when taken with the results of Deligne on
the degeneration of the Hodge-Deligne spectral sequence, constitute an algebraic proof of
this sort of result. Strictly speaking, the result given here does not quite imply Kawamata’s
result because our deﬁnition of semistability (involving a geometric condition on the divi-
sors at inﬁnity, as opposed to a monodromy-type condition) is stronger than Kawamata’s.
(Kollar uses a similar deﬁnition to our own.) Finally, as mentioned in the Introduction,
there is the paper [7]. The proof given here is a simpliﬁcation of the author’s original
proof, following a suggestion of Prof A. Ogus.
Theorem 3.4: Let f :( X,E ) → (S, D) be a semistable family of varieties of relative
dimension d,w i t h S a smooth, proper scheme over a ﬁeld L of characteristic zero. Let
(A, ∇
A,F i(A)) be a globally crystalline ﬁltered vector bundle with connection on (X,E ).
Then for any nonnegative integer α, the coherent sheaf of OS -modules
Rαf∗(ωX/S ⊗OX (A/F1(A))∨)
is a semi-positive vector bundle, as are all of its tensor powers.
Proof: First of all, by Lemma 3.2, since taking de Rham cohomology and tensor products
does not take us out of the category MF∇ , we may assume that f is the identity, and
we may prove the result for the “ﬁrst tensor power,” i.e., the original globally crystalline
object. Also, without loss of generality, let us assume thatL is algebraically closed. Let S
be the vector bundle (A/F
1(A))∨.L e tr = rank(A).
Let us assume that S is not semi-positive. Then there exists some smooth, proper,
connected curve C over L, together with a ﬁnite morphism ψ : C → S and a nonzero
11

morphism SC →Q ,w h e r eQ is a line bundle of negative degree. By Proposition 1.2, after
replacing C by a ﬁnite covering of C, we may assume that h0(C, Q−1) ≥ 1+ r.T h u s ,b y
dualizing the morphism SC →Q , we see that h0(C, S∨
C) ≥ 1+ r. On the other hand, by
Lemma 1.4, there exists a birational mapπ : ˜S → S obtained as a sequence of blow-ups at
closed points such that the morphismC → ˜S (obtained from ψ by the valuative criterion of
properness) factors through a smooth, proper, connected curveC′ embedded in ˜S:t h a ti s ,
we have a ﬁnite morphism ψ1 : C → C′ and an embedding ψ2 : C′ ↪→ ˜S whose composite
is the morphism C → ˜S. Moreover, by Lemma 1.4, we can assume that the image ofC′ is
transversely positioned with respect to ˜D = π−1(D)red. It thus follows that by spreading
out, specializing, completing, we obtain objects CA, SA, DA,e t c .o v e rar i n gA satisfying
the hypotheses given at the beginning of §2, together with a divisor FA ⊆ CA such that
ψA :( CA,FA) → (SA,DA)i s admissibly factorizable (in the sense of the deﬁnition given
directly before Proposition 2.2). Thus, for the rest of the proof, we shall work overA,a n d
omit the subscripts for all the objects that have been base changed into objects over A.
Thus, in summary, we have an admissibly factorizable morphismψ :( C,F ) → (S, D),
such that h0(CK, S∨
CK ) ≥ 1+ r,w h e r eK, as usual, is the quotient ﬁeld of A.N o w
recall that S∨ = A/F1(A). Let us consider the inverse system ( M, ∇M ,F i(M),φi)o f
objects of MF∇
[0,a](S◦) associated to (A, ∇ A,F j(A)) whose existence is guaranteed by the
fact that ( A, ∇ A,F j(A)) is globally crystalline. (We shall regard this inverse system as
a single object, which is ﬂat over Zp.) Let us apply the pull-back functor of Proposi-
tion 2.2 to ( M, ∇M ,F i(M),φi)t oo b t a i naZp-ﬂat object (actually, an inverse system)
(N, ∇N ,F i(N),ψ i)o f MF∇
[0,a](C◦). Now since h0(CK, S∨
CK ) ≥ 1+ r,a n dN/F1(N)i sa
direct sum of subquotients of the monodromy ﬁltration on S∨
C = ψ∗(M/F 1(M)), we thus
obtain that
h0(CK,(N/F1(N))K) ≥ 1+ r
By Lemma 2.1, this implies that dimK H0
DR(CK,NK) ≥ 1+ r.S i n c er is the rank of the
vector bundle M, and hence also of the vector bundle N, we thus conclude from Lemma
3.3 that we have a contradiction. This completes the proof. ⃝
In particular, let us consider (under the hypotheses of Theorem 3.4) the globally
crystalline triple ( B,F i(B), ∇ B) (on ( S, D)) given by R2d−i(f ◦
DR)∗(OX), together with
its Hodge ﬁltration and the Gauss-Manin connection. Let ( A,F i(A), ∇ A) be the triple
obtained from ( B,F i(B), ∇ B) by shifting the ﬁltration down by d − i places. Just as in
Lemma 3.2, we see that
(A/F1(A))∨ =( Rdf∗(Ωlog
X/S)d−i)∨ = f∗((Ωlog
X/S)i)
Thus, if we apply Theorem 3.4 to (A,F i(A), ∇ A)a n dt h eidentity morphism on S, we see
obtain the following:
12

Corollary 3.5: Let f :( X,E ) → (S, D) be as above. Then for any nonnegative
integer α, the coherent sheaf of OS -modules
f∗((Ωlog
X/S)α)
is a semi-positive vector bundle, as are all of its tensor powers.
Appendix: The Case of One-Dimensional Fibres
Let f : X → S, D,a n dE be as in §1, with f semistable and of relative dimension
one, and suppose that S is a curve. Let us assume that the ringA in §1 is an algebraically
closed ﬁeld k of characteristic zero. Then we have the following
Theorem : The vector bundle f∗ωX/S on S is semi-positive in the sense that there
do not exist nonzero morphisms φ : f∗ωX/S →Q ,w h e r eQ is a line bundle on S of negative
degree.
Proof: Let us assume that such a φ exists. By Proposition 1.2, we may assume that
dimkH0(S, Q−1) ≥ g +1 ,w h e r eg is the genus of the generic ﬁbre of f. Thus, by con-
sidering φ∨ : Q−1 → R1f∗OX, we see that dimkH0(S,R1f∗OX) ≥ g +1 . B yt h eL e r a y -
Serre spectral sequence for f applied to the sheaf OX, we see that we have, in fact,
dimkH1(X, OX) ≥ q + g +1 ,w h e r eq is the genus of S. On the other hand, since we are
in characteristic zero, dimkH1(X, OX) is exactly the dimension of Pic0(X)o v e rk.T h u s ,
we see that dimk(Pic0(X)) ≥ q + g +1 .
Now we recompute the dimension of Pic0(X)b ym e a n so fl-adic cohomology to see
that this is absurd. Indeed, by applying the Leray-Serre spectral sequence for fet to
the ´etale sheaf Ql(1), we see that dimQl H1(Xet,Ql(1)) ≤ 2q +2 g. On the other hand,
Kummer theory tells us that dimQl H1(Xet,Ql(1)) is equal to twice the dimension (over
k)o f Pic0(X)( s i n c ePic0(X) is an abelian variety overk). Putting this together with the
inequality derived in the ﬁrst paragraph, we obtain a contradiction. ⃝
Bibliography
[1] G. Faltings, Crystalline Cohomology and p-adic Galois Representations, Proceedings
of the First JAMI Conference, Johns Hopkins University Press (1990), 25-79.
[2] G. Faltings, p-adic Hodge Theory, Journal of the AMS 1 (1988), 255-299.
13

[3] J.M. Fontaine and G. Laﬀaille, Construction de repr´esentations p-adiques, Ann. Sci.
ENS. 15 (1982), 547-608.
[4] J.M. Fontaine, Sur certains types de repr´esentations p-adiques du groupe de Galois
d’un corps local: construction d’un anneau de Barsotti-Tate, Ann. of Math.115 (1982),
529-577.
[5] T. Fujita, On K¨ahler Fibre Spaces over Curves, J. Math. Soc. Japan 30 (1978), 779-
794.
[6] R. Hartshorne, Algebraic Geometry, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 52, Springer-
Verlag, 1977.
[7] L. Illusie, R´eduction semi-stable et d´ecomposition de complexes de de Rham `ac o e ﬃ -
cients, Duke Math. Journal, Vol. 60, No. 1 (1990), 139-185.
[8] K. Kato, Logarithmic Structures of Fontaine-Illusie, Proceedings of the First JAMI
Conference, Johns Hopkins University Press (1990), 191-224.
[9] Y. Kawamata, Characterization of Abelian Varieties, Compositio Math. 43 (1981),
253-276.
[10] J. Kollar, Higher Direct Image Sheaves I, Ann. of Math. 123 (1986), pp. 11-42.
[11] E. Viehweg, Weak Positivity and the Stability of Certain Hilbert Points, Invent. Math.
96 (1989), 639-667.
14