RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ON FROBENIOIDS
Shinichi Mochizuki
December 2015
The Geometry of Frobenioids I: The General Theory ([FrdI])
Question 1: Deﬁnition 1.2, (i): Since the validity of the condition that two arrows
be “metrically equivalent” depends solely on the images via “Div” of the two ar-
rows, might it not be better to call such arrows “Div-equivalent” and then, to avoid
confusion, to use the term “Φ-equivalent” for arrows that, in the current terminol-
ogy, are called “Div-equivalent”?
Response 1:
First of all, the terminology “Φ-equivalent” is not very good since it depends on
the notation “Φ” for aspeciﬁcmonoid on a base category. The sense underlying
the terminology“base-equivalent”/“Div-equivalent”is the idea that the pair of mor-
phisms induce thesame morphism on the base object/collection of divisors of the
base object. That is to say, these two terms (i.e., base-/Div-equivalent) are most
naturally regarded as being “parallel”. Thus, the term“divisor-equivalent”would
be one reasonable alternative to “Div-equivalent”. By contrast, the sense underly-
ing the terminology“metrically equivalent”/“isometric”is that it corresponds, in
the case of Frobenioids that arise frommetrized line bundles, to the idea that the
morphism(s) involved induce(s) thesame/no discrepancy in metrics. That is to
say, from the point of view of maintaining the close relationship to the term“iso-
metric”, it does not seem to me that it would be desirable to replace “metrically
equivalent” by “Div-equivalent”.
Question 2: Deﬁnition 1.2, (ii): Are there any other equivalent deﬁnitions of the
notion of a pull-back morphism?
Response 2:
I am not aware of any natural equivalent deﬁnitions. It seems that the deﬁni-
tion given is suﬃciently natural, relative to the way in which the term “pull-back
morphism” is typically applied in arithmetic geometry.
Question 3: Deﬁnition 1.2, (iii): Is it true that, if one restricts one’s attention to
the portion of the theory of Frobenioids that is used in the IUTeich papers, then
the only Frobenioids in which there exist morphisms that are not co-angular are
the archimedean Frobenioids?
Response 3:
Yes. Indeed, the only Frobenioids that are used in the IUTeich papers are the
following:
Typeset by AMS-TEX
1

2 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(F1) tempered Frobenioids, i.e., a generalization developed in [EtTh],§3, §4,
§5, of the geometric example given in [FrdI], Example 6.1, to the case of
the tempered coveringsthat arise in the theory of the theta function;
(F2) Frobenioidsassociated to number ﬁeldsas in [FrdI], Example 6.3 (cf.,
e.g., [IUTchIII], Example 3.6), together with therealiﬁcationsassociated
to (certain of) such Frobenioids;
(F3) certain special cases of thep-adic Frobenioidsdiscussed in [FrdII], Ex-
ample 1.1 (cf., e.g., the Frobenioids “Cv”, “C⊢
v ”c o n s i d e r e di n[ I U T c h I ] ,
Example 3.3, (i), which also appear in R11 and R13 — i.e., the responses
to questions Q11 and Q13 — below), together with various related Frobe-
nioids obtained by forming associated realiﬁcationsor by forming the
quotient “O×μ = O×/Oμ” of the units “O×” by the torsion subgroup
“Oμ ⊆O×”;
(F4) copies of the archimedean Frobenioiddiscussed in [FrdII], Example 3.3,
(ii) (i.e., the Frobenioid denoted “C”).
Here, we note that (F3) and (F4) areinessential since a Frobenioid as in (F3)
essentially amounts to (i.e., may be replaced by) a suitable topological monoid with
a continuous action by a topological group, while a Frobenioid as in (F4) essentially
amounts to a copy of the topological monoidO⊿
C (i.e., the multiplicative topological
monoid of nonzero complex numbers of absolute value≤1). In this context, it
should, however, be pointed out that, in fact, (F3) is a bit“less inessential”than
(F4) since (F3) occurs in the theory of (F1). At any rate, from the point of view
of studying IUTeich,
(I1) in [FrdI], one may assume that all Frobenioids aremodel Frobenioids(cf.
[FrdI], Theorem 5.2, (ii)), which implies, in particular, that every object
of a Frobenioid isisotropic, and that every morphism of a Frobenioid is
co-angular;
(I2) one may in factignore [FrdII], §3, §4, §5.
Here, we note that (I1) results in asubstantial simpliﬁcationof the theory of [FrdI].
Question 4: Deﬁnition 1.2 and the Chart of Types of Morphisms in a Frobenioid at
the end of [FrdI]: The deﬁnitions of many types of morphisms concern properties of
1) the projection to the base category, 2) the zero divisor image, 3) the Frobenius
degree. Might it not be easier to keep track of the terms (and, moreover, allow
one to simplify the Chart of Types of Morphisms) if one instead refers to linear
morphisms as 3-morphisms, to isometries as 2-morphisms, to base-isomorphisms
as 1-morphisms, to pre-steps as 13-morphisms, to morphisms of Frobenius type
(in light of later results) as co-angular 12-morphisms, to pull-back morphisms (in
light of later results) as co-angular 23-morphisms, and to isometric pre-steps as
123-morphisms? Then co-angular 123-morphisms are isomorphisms, etc.
Response 4
:
The point of the naming conventions introduced in Deﬁnition 1.2 was precisely
to give “combinatorial”,o r “mechanical”(i.e., involving “1”, “2”, and “3”) char-
acterizations of various types of morphisms that typically appear in arithmetic
geometry. That is to say, the terminology was chosen so as tosuggest well-known

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ON FROBENIOIDS 3
situations familiar from conventional arithmetic geometry. The content of the def-
initions of this terminology was then intended to be a sort oftranslation of termi-
nology that was close to familiar wording in conventional arithmetic geometryinto
combinatorial/mechanical/“123”-type language. If, however, you have a proposal
for a slightly diﬀerent sort of table involving “123”, then you are certainly welcome
to construct such a table.
Question 5: Deﬁnition 1.3 contains 7 parts, some of which consist of subparts.
Might it be possible, if one restricts one’s attention to the applications to IUTeich,
to reduce the number of deﬁning properties?
Response 5:
In light of (I1) of R3, properties (iii), (a), (b); (v); and (vii) of Deﬁnition 1.3 may
be omitted.
Question 6: Remark 3.1.2: “the image of 1∈Z≥0”: Does this expression in fact
refer to “the image of (1,1) ∈F”?
Response 6:
Yes. I believe that the intended meaning is clear from the context, but this issue is
addressed in the newly released version of the Comments for [FrdI].
Question 7: Theorem 5.2, (i), (b): Should “to as the projection toD to φ”b e
replaced by “to as the projection toD of φ?
Response 7:
Thank you. This is indeed a misprint which is corrected in the newly released
version of the Comments for [FrdI].
Question 8: I have not read the IUTeich papers yet. I wonder if there are Theorems
and Propositions of [FrdI] whose statements hold by obvious reasons for all the
Frobenioids that appear in the papers on IUTeich (and which therefore may be
omitted in one’s preparation for studying the IUTeich papers)?
Response 8:
As discussed in R3, once oneassumes (I1), the entire theory of [FrdI] becomemuch
easier. One approach (cf. R3) to presenting the theory of Frobenioids to people
whose main interest is to prepare for studying the IUTeich papers might be
(A1) to start by discussing thefundamental exampleof [FrdI], Deﬁnition 1.1,
(iii);
(A2) then proceed to discussing the explicit construction ofmodel Frobenioids
as in [FrdI], Theorem 5.2 (cf. also Proposition T in R23 below);
(A3) explainhow, byspecifyingappropriate divisor monoidsandrational func-
tion monoids, one may obtain [FrdI], Examples 6.1, 6.3; [FrdII], Example
1.1, as special cases of the notion of amodel Frobenioid;
(A4) then proceed to discussing the [FrdI], Corollary 4.11 (which, in fact,
may, from the point of view of studying IUTeich, simply beaccepted on
faith!), in the case of model Frobenioids, explaining a few of the main,
representative ideas of the proofs (such as [FrdI], Remark 3.1.2).
In this context, I should perhaps mention that, other than [FrdI], Corollary 4.11,
perhaps the most important property of the theory of Frobenioids that is used in
[EtTh], §3, §4, §5 (and hence also in IUTeich) is [FrdI], Proposition 5.6.

4 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Question 9: Remark 6.3.1: How much is known about the use of Frobenioids to
studyarithmeticlinebundlesonregularpropermodelsofcurvesovernumberﬁelds?
Should one look at Frobenioids whose base category is a Frobenioid? Or should
one perhaps develop a theory of two-dimensional Frobenioids, where the monoid of
positive integers is replaced by the monoid of positive elements ofZ× Z equipped
with the lexicographical ordering?
Response 9:
Note that in Example 6.1, there isno restrictionon thedimension of the varietyV.
In particular, the nontriviality of extending Example 6.3 to the case of arithmetic
line bundles on (two-dimensional) regular proper models of curves over number
ﬁelds doesnot lie in thetwo-dimensionality of such models. In particular, there is
no issueof being having to contend with “two-dimensional Frobenioids” or monoids
more complicated than N that arise from lexicographic orderings. Rather, the
nontriviality (i.e., the “complications” referred to in Remark 6.3.1) of extending
Example 6.3 as discussed in Remark 6.3.1 lies in the issue of how to represent,
in a category-theoretic fashion, the notion of anarbitrary (say, C∞-class) metric
on the archimedean localization of an arithmetic line bundle. I have not thought
about this issue in much detail, but it appears to involve various nontrivial technical
complications. Ontheotherhand, anotherpossibilityforfurtherdevelopmentofthe
theory of Frobenioids that is not particularly related to archimedean localizations,
but is related to more complicated monoids is the following:
One could try to construct some sort of more general type of Frobenioid
that corresponds to the“tautological system of monoids corresponding to
valuations on Berkovich spaces”.
That is to say, since each point of a Berkovich space corresponds to a valuation,
each such point has a natural monoid (i.e., the monoid determined by the valua-
tion) attached to it. One could then try to consider the abstract topological space
(i.e., determined by a Berkovich space) equipped with this tautological system of
monoids, construct some sort of associated category (i.e., in the spirit of the notion
of a Frobenioid), and then see to what extent various properties of this category
can be reconstructedcategory-theoretically, i.e., without using, for instance, some
given p-adic scheme that gave rise to the Berkovich space.

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ON FROBENIOIDS 5
The Geometry of Frobenioids II: Poly-Frobenioids ([FrdII])
Question 10: Example 1.1, (i): The object ΦZ
0 is not deﬁned in [FrdII]. As a result,
in the ﬁrst displayed line of (ii), ΦΛ
0 is not deﬁned for the type Λ =Z, i.e., there is
no explicitly stated restriction there to the eﬀect that Λ̸= Z.
Response 10:
Thankyou. Thisisindeedaslightoversightintheuseofnotationwhichisaddressed
in the newly released version of the Comments for [FrdII].
Question 11: Example 1.1, (ii): In the third line of this example, is it assumed that
the output monoprime monoids of Φ are of type Λ?
Response 11:
No, this is certainly not assumed. For instance, in the case of thep-adic Frobenioid
“Cv” considered in [IUTchI], Example 3.3, (i), the output monoprime monoids of
Φa r eo ft y p eQ ̸=Λ= Z.
Question 12: Example 1.1, (ii): What is Φ(K)? Probably “K”i su s e da sas h o r t -
hand for “Spec(K)”, an object ofD0, but even then Φ is a functor deﬁned onD,
not onD0.
Response 12:
Thank you. This is indeed a misprint which is corrected in the newly released
version of the Comments for [FrdII].
Question 13: Example 1.1, (ii): I do not understand the meaning of “absolutely
primitive” and “ﬁeldwise saturated”. (Here, I took into account the correction in
the Comments for [FrdII], replacing Φ(K)b yΦ (K)gp in the deﬁnition of “ﬁeldwise
saturated”.) The current deﬁnitions appear to imply the following conclusions: if
Λ= Z (resp. Q, resp. R), then Φ is absolutely primitive iﬀ the output monoprime
m o n o i d so fΦa r eo ft y p eZ (resp. Z or Q, resp. Z or Q or R); Φ is always ﬁeldwise
saturated. Is this what was intended?
Response 13:
First of all, it is true that Φ isalways absolutely primitive if Λ =R. Also, you
are correct in asserting that, when Λ =Q,Φi s absolutely primitive if and only
if the output monoprime monoids of Φ are of type≤Λ= Q (i.e., relative to the
ordering on{Z, Q, R} induced by the relation of inclusion). In particular,the notion
of being absolutely primitive is only interesting whenΛ= Z. On the other hand,
I was entirely unable to understand the remaining cases of your assertion. Write
ord(p) ∈ord(Q×
p ) for the element determined byp ∈Qp.L e tn ∈N≥1. Consider
t h ec a s ew h e r eD = D0, and Φ is given by the assignment
Spec(K) ↦→ 1
n · N·ord(p)
(for Spec(K) ∈Ob(D0)). (Thus, the output monoprime monoids of Φ are of type
Z.) Then Φ isnot ﬁeldwise saturated for anyn ∈N≥1. (Indeed, if the ramiﬁcation
index eK of K over Qp does not divide n,t h e no r d (K×)= 1
eK
· Z · ord(p) ̸⊆
1
n · Z·ord(p) = Φ(Spec(K))gp.) Moreover, when Λ =Z, it holds that Φ isabsolutely
primitive if and only ifn = 1. (Indeed, Φ(Spec(K)) =1
n · N·ord(p) ⊆Z·ord(p)=
Λ·ord(Q×
p ) if and only ifn = 1.) Finally, I should perhaps mention that this sort
of Φ (for Λ =Z) in the casen = 1 appears in the case of thep-adic Frobenioid
“C⊢
v ” considered in [IUTchI], Example 3.3, (i).

6 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Question 14: Remark 1.2.2, the last sentence: If one works with id`eles, it is not
unnatural to consider situations wherep is mapped top times a unit.
Response 14:
Your assertion does not appear to contradict the assertion that the situation consid-
ered in Remark 1.2.2 “never arises in conventional scheme theory”. That is to say,
“conventional scheme theory” refers to the situation where one only considers mor-
phisms of schemes, i.e., (when the schemes involved areaﬃne, such as Spec(Qp))
ring homomorphisms. T h ep o i n th e r ei st h a ti ti snever the case (at least when
u ̸=1 )t h a ta na s s i g n m e n tQ×
p ∋ p ↦→ p·u ∈Q×
p of the sort considered here arises
from aring homomorphism Qp → Qp.
Question 15: Example 1.3, (i): What isBtemp(Π)Π/Π0, i.e., what is the role of the
subindex Π/Π0?
Response 15:
This is a special case of the notational convention “CA” (i.e., whereA is an object
of the categoryC) discussed at the beginning of the discussion of “Categories” in
[FrdI], §0.
Question 16: Deﬁnition 2.2, (i), and Example 2.2, (ii), (b), “AD is Galois”: What
is the deﬁnition of a Galois object? I was unable to ﬁnd the deﬁnition of a Galois
object in [FrdI], [FrdII].
Response 16:
Here, the category “D” under consideration is, as discussed in Example 1.3, (i), a
subcategory of a category (i.e.,“temperoid”) of the sort discussed in [SemiAnbd],§3
(cf. [SemiAnbd], Deﬁnition 3.1, (ii)). The term “Galois” is deﬁned in [SemiAnbd],
Deﬁnition 3.1, (iv).
Question 17: Deﬁnition 2.2, (i):H is a normal open subgroup ofG, and, in par-
ticular, it is possible that H = G. Why then is the homomorphism G → GA
determined up to composition with an inner automorphism, whileH → HA is only
well-deﬁned up to composition with conjugation by an element ofG?
Response 17:
The arrowH ↠ HA of the third display of Deﬁnition 2.2, (i), is determined pre-
cisely by restricting the arrow G ↠ GA of the second display of Deﬁnition 2.2,
(i). Thus, theG-conjugacy indeterminacies of the latter arrowG ↠ GA necessar-
ily induce G-conjugacy indeterminacies on the former arrowH ↠ HA.T h e r e i s
no reason to expect that these indeterminacies may be “reduced” toH-conjugacy
indeterminacies.
Question 18: Deﬁnition 2.2, (ii): I could not ﬁnd any explicit deﬁnition of the ac-
tion ofH on μN(A). Does it act via the homomorphismH → HA?
Response 18:
Yes. My understanding was that this is implicit in the phrasing “the natural sur-
jective homomorphismH ↠ HA induces isomorphisms” that immediately precedes
the ﬁrst display of Deﬁnition 2.2, (ii).
Question 19: Deﬁnition 2.2, (iii): The wording here seems to imply that the notions
of “ﬁeldwise saturated” and “absolutely primitive” are complementary to one other.
As I wrote in Q13, I was unable to understand the deﬁnitions of these terms.

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ON FROBENIOIDS 7
Response 19:
Theassertionthat(inthesituationunderconsideration)ifΦisabsolutelyprimitive,
then it is not ﬁeldwise saturated follows immediately from an argument of the sort
discussed in R13: that is to say, it suﬃces to consider the case whereeK ̸=1 ,s o
ord(K×)= 1
eK
· Z·ord(p) ̸⊆Φ(Spec(K))gp ⊆Z·ord(p)=Λ ·ord(Q×
p ).
Question 20: Beginning of the proof of Theorem 2.4, the second sentence: could
you provide a veriﬁcation of this fact?
Response 20:
This fact follows immediately from the deﬁnitions (cf. the arguments used in R13
and R19).
Question 21: Deﬁnition 3.1, (v): Should AutFA(B) be replaced by AutFA(B → A)?
Response 21:
This is not a misprint, but instead reﬂects my understanding that in this context
(i.e., where one considers “B” as an object of “FA”), the “object ofFA” denoted by
“B” is precisely the object determined by the arrowB → A under consideration.
Nevertheless, this issue is addressed in the newly released version of the Comments
for [FrdII].
Question 22: Example 3.3: Is the categoryC0 equivalent to some model Frobenioid?
Response 22:
No. It is clear from the discussion of Example 3.3, (i), (ii) (cf. also Deﬁnition 3.1,
(iii)) thatC0 contains non-isotropic objects. Thus, the fact thatC0 is not equivalent
to a model Frobenioid follows formally from the fact (cf. Theorem 5.2, (ii)) that a
model Frobenioid is necessarily ofisotropic type.

8 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Both [FrdI] and [FrdII]:
Question 23: [FrdI], Examples 6.1 and 6.3, “one veriﬁes immediately that a mor-
phism L→M ... may be thought of as consisting ...”, and [FrdII], Example 1.1,
“we observe in passing that an object ofC0 lying over Spec(K) may be thought of
as a metrized line bundle on Spec(K) ...”: It seems that both are special cases of a
general property of model Frobenioids that allows one to think of the objects of a
model Frobenioid as metrized line bundles. If this is the case, then it seems that it
would be preferable to provide, for ease of reference, an explicit statement of such
a general property and its proof.
Response 23:
Both instances of this pattern are immediate from the deﬁnitions and simply
amount to the well-known observation that a (metrized) line bundle may be under-
stood as a rational equivalence class of divisors. It does not appear to be feasible to
formulate this sort of pattern as a “general property” of Frobenioids since, in gen-
eral, only the “rational equivalence class of divisors”aspect appears in the general
theory of Frobenioids. That is to say, the“(metrized) line bundle”aspect doesnot
appear in the general theory of Frobenioids; it only appears in speciﬁc situations
where oneconstructs a Frobenioid as a suitably deﬁned category of (metrized) line
bundles on a(n) (arithmetic) scheme. In particular, since it appears diﬃcult to for-
mulate such constructions from scheme theory in any sort of generality, it does not
appear realistic (at least relative to the theory of Frobenioids in its present form)
to expect a formulation of a “general property” of the sort that you appear to have
in mind. I suppose, however, that onetautologicalapproach (i.e., as in [IUTchIII],
Example 3.6, (i)) to making the construction of [FrdI], Theorem 5.2, (i), look more
like a category of (metrized) line bundles is the following result (whose proof is
immediate from the deﬁnitions):
Proposition T. (T autological Torsor-theoretic Approach to Model Frobe-
nioids) Let D, Φ, B, DivB : B → Φgp,a n dC be as in [FrdI], Theorem 5.2. Write
Ctor for the category deﬁned as follows:
· An object of Ctor is a triple
(AD,TA,τA)
where AD ∈Ob(D); TA is a B(AD)-torsor; τA is a trivialization of the
Φ(AD)gp-torsor obtained fromTA by executing the “change of structure
group” operation determined by the homomorphismDivB(AD): B(AD) →
Φ(AD)gp.T h u s ,f o ra n yd ∈Z, we obtain an object
(AD,T ⊗d
A ,τ⊗d
A )
by executing the “change of structure group” operation determined by the
homomorphism B(AD) → B(AD) given by multiplication byd.
· a morphism of Ctor
φ: A
def
=( AD,TA,τA) → B
def
=( BD,TB,τB)
is a collection of data as follows: (a) an elementd ∈N≥1; (b) a morphism
Base(φ): AD → BD, which determines [i.e., by executing the “change of

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ON FROBENIOIDS 9
structure group” operations determined by the homomorphismsB(BD) →
B(AD), Φ(BD)gp → Φ(AD)gp] an objectφ∗B =( AD,φ∗TB,φ∗τB);( c )a n
isomorphism of B(AD)-torsors
T⊗d
A
∼
→ φ∗TB
that maps the trivializationτ⊗d
A to an element in theΦ(AD)-orbit of the
trivialization φ∗τB. Composites of morphisms are deﬁned in the evident
fashion.
Then there is anatural equivalence of categories
C
∼
→C tor
deﬁned as follows: An object(AD,α) of C [cf. [FrdI], Theorem 5.2, (i)] is mapped
to the object(AD,TA,τA) of Ctor,w h e r eTA is the trivial B(AD)-torsor, and τA is
the trivialization ofTA obtained by shifting the tautological trivialization ofTA by
the element −α∈Φ(AD)gp. A morphism (AD,α) → (BD,β) of C determined by
data as in [FrdI], Theorem 5.2, (i), (a), (b), (c), (d), is mapped to the morphism
(AD,TA,τA) → (BD,TB,τB) of Ctor for which the data (a), (b) [as in the deﬁnition
of Ctor] is determined [in the evident way] by the data of [FrdI], Theorem 5.2,
(i), (a), (b), and the data (c) [as in the deﬁnition ofCtor] is the isomorphism of
trivial B(AD)-torsors T⊗d
A
∼
→ φ∗TB determined by multiplication by the element
uφ∈B(AD) of [FrdI], Theorem 5.2, (i), (d).
Question 24: In view of Q23, might it not be possible to replace the current deﬁni-
tionof a model Frobenioid bysome sortof alternativedeﬁnition whichuses metrized
line bundles or some variant of metrized line bundles as in [FrdII], Example 3.3,
and would then include both this example and the examples referred to in Q23
as special cases? One could then discuss the relationship between this alternative
deﬁnition and the current deﬁnition of a model Frobenioid.
Response 24:
As discussed in R22, the category C0 of [FrdII], Example 3.3, is not equivalent
to a model Frobenioid. In fact, the original deﬁnitionof a Frobenioid given in
[FrdI], Deﬁnition 1.3, was intended/arrived atprecisely as an approachto giving a
uniﬁed treatmentof the examples that you refer to (i.e., [FrdI], Examples 6.1 and
6.3; [FrdII], Examples 1.1 and 3.3), together with thetempered Frobenioidstreated
in [EtTh]. The price of insisting on such a uniﬁed approach may be seen in the
numerous technicalitiesthat appear in the theory of [FrdI], [FrdII], e.g., involving
objects that are not necessarily isotropicand morphisms that arenot necessarily
co-angular. I do not know at the present time of another approach to obtaining such
a uniﬁed formulation. (It would be interesting, however, if you are able to ﬁnd an
alternative approach to obtaining such a uniﬁed formulation.) I suppose that, from
the point of view of using model Frobenioids, perhaps the closest kind of mathemat-
ical object that appears in [FrdI], [FrdII] to the sort of alternative version of a model
Frobenioid that you seem to have in mind may be seen in thepoly-Frobenioidsof
[FrdII],§5, i.e., in the case where one takes theglobaland nonarchimedeanportions
of the poly-Frobenioid to bemodel Frobenioidsand thearchimedeanp o r t i o no ft h e
poly-Frobenioid to be a Frobenioid as in [FrdII], Example 3.3 — cf., e.g., [FrdII],
Example 5.6.

10 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Question 25: To what extent could one use the theory of ad`eles and id`eles to
simplify the portion of the theory of Frobenioids, as it is currently formulated, that
is used in the papers on IUTeich?
Response 25:
As explained in R3, the only types of Frobenioids that appear in IUTeich are the
types discussed in (F1), (F2), (F3), and (F4). Of these, the Frobenioids of (F3)
and (F4) may be replaced by very simple objects. Also, the Frobenioids of (F2)
are rather elementary and may be treated to a substantial extent without invoking
the general theory of Frobenioids. On the other hand, the theory developed in
[EtTh], §3, §4, §5, concerning thetempered Frobenioidsof (F1) is rather nontrivial.
I do not see any reason to believe that this theory may be simpliﬁed by using
ad`eles/id`eles. Here, let us recall that model Frobenioids(i.e., such as tempered
Frobenioids) essentially amount to the data consisting of adivisor monoid and a
rational function monoid(as in [FrdI], Theorem 5.2). This data is, in fact,already
in a form that is very close, in spirit, to objects that occur in the theory of id`eles.
On the other hand, onefundamental diﬀerencebetween the conventional theory of
id`eles and the theory of Frobenioids is that the former starts from aﬁxed number
ﬁeldand concerns the study of various properties of id`eles and related objects in a
fashion that makesessential use of the way in which such objects were originally
constructed from a number ﬁeld. By contrast, the theory of Frobenioids starts
from abstract “combinatorial objects”(such asabstract monoids)t h a ta r et r e a t e d
without reference to any rings/schemes (such as number ﬁelds). That is to say,
the goal of the theory of Frobenioids is to see just how much of the structure that
might arise, in various conventional situations, from some sort of ring or scheme,
may in fact bereconstructed purely category-theoretically, i.e.,without referenceto
any rings/schemes (cf. [FrdI],§I2). I do not see any reason to expect that the use
of ad`eles/id`eles would result in a meaningful simpliﬁcation of the theory of such
reconstruction algorithms.