REPORT ON DISCUSSIONS, HELD DURING THE
PERIOD MARCH 15 – 20, 2018, CONCERNING
INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY (IUTCH)
Shinichi Mochizuki
February 2019
§1. The present document is a report on discussions held during the period March
15 – 20, 2018, concerninginter-universal Teichm¨uller theory (IUTch). These
discussions were held in a seminar room on the ﬁfth ﬂoor of Maskawa Hall, Kyoto
University, according to the following schedule:
· March 15 (Thurs.): 2PM∼between 5PM and 6PM,
· March 16 (Fri.): 10AM∼between 5PM and 6PM,
· March 17 (Sat.): 10AM∼between 5PM and 6PM,
· March 19 (Mon.): 10AM∼between 5PM and 6PM,
· March 20 (Tues.): 10AM∼between 5PM and 6PM.
(On the days when the discussions began at 10AM, there was a lunch break for
one and a half to two hours.) Participation in these discussions was restricted
to the following mathematicians (listed in order of age):Peter Scholze, Yuichiro
Hoshi, Jakob Stix,a n dShinichi Mochizuki. All four mathematicians participated
in all of the sessions listed above (except for Hoshi, who was absent on March
16). The existence of these discussions was kept conﬁdential until the conclusion
of the ﬁnal session. From an organizational point of view, the discussions took the
form of “negotations” between two “teams”: one team (HM), consisting ofHoshi
and Mochizuki, played the role of explaining various aspects of IUTch; the other
team (SS), consisting of Scholze and Stix, played the role of challenging various
aspects of the explanations of HM. Most of the sessions were conducted in the
following format: Mochizuki would stand and explain various aspects of IUTch,
often supplementing oral explanations by writing on whiteboards using markers in
various colors; the other participants remained seated, for the most part, but would,
at times, make questions or comments or brieﬂy stand to write on the whiteboards.
§2. Scholze has, for some time, taken a somewhat negative position concerning
IUTch, and his position, and indeed the position of SS, remained negative even
after the March discussions. My own conclusion, and indeed the conclusion of HM,
after engaging in the March discussions, is as follows:
The negative position of SS is a consequence of certainfundamental
misunderstandings (to be explained in more detail in the remainder of
Typeset by AMS-TEX
1

2 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
the present report — cf. §17 for a brief summary) on the part of SS
concerning IUTch, and, in particular, doesnot imply the existence of
any ﬂaws whatsoever in IUTch.
The essential gist of these misunderstandings — many of which center around
erroneous attemptsto “simplify”IUTeich — may be summarizedvery roughly
as follows:
(Smm) Suppose that A and B are positive real numbers, which aredeﬁned so as
to satisfy therelation
−2B = −A
(which corresponds to the Θ-link). One then proves atheorem
−2B ≤−2A+1
(which corresponds to the multiradial representation of [IUTchIII],
Theorem 3.11). This theorem, together with the abovedeﬁning relation,
implies abound onA
−A ≤−2A+1, i.e., A ≤ 1
(which corresponds to [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12). From the point of view
of this (very rough!) summary of IUTch, the misunderstandings of SS
amount to the assertion that
the theory remainsessentially unaﬀected even if one takesA = B,
which implies (in light of the abovedeﬁning relation)t h a tA = B =0 ,
in contradiction to the initial assumption thatA and B are positive real
numbers. In fact, however, the essential content (i.e., main results) of
IUTch fail(s) to hold under the assumption “A = B”; moreover, the
“contradiction”A = B = 0 is nothing more than a superﬁcial consequence
of theextraneous assumption“A = B” and, in particular, doesnot imply
the existence of anyﬂaws whatsoever in IUTch. (We refer to (SSIdEx),
(ModEll), (HstMod) below for a “slightly less rough” explanation of the
essential logical structureof an issue that is closely related to theextrane-
ous assumption“A = B”i nt e r m so f
· complex structures on real vector spaces
or, alternatively (and essentially equivalently), in terms of the well-known
classical theory of
· moduli of complex elliptic curves.
Additional comparisons with well-known classical topics such as
· the invariance of heights of elliptic curves over number ﬁelds
with respect to isogeny,
· Grothendieck’s deﬁnition of the notion of a connection,a n d
· the diﬀerential geometry surroundingSL2(R)
may be found in§16.)

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 3
Indeed, in the present context, it is perhaps useful to recall the following well-known
generalities concerning logical reasoning:
(GLR1) Given any mathematical argument,i ti sa l w a y se a s yt od e r i v eacon-
tradiction by arbitrarilyidentifyingmathematical objects that must be
regarded asdistinct in the situation discussed in the argument. On the
other hand, this does not,b ya n ym e a n s ,imply the existence of any
logical ﬂaws in the original mathematical argument!
(GLR2) Put another way, the correct interpretation of the contradiction
obtained in (GLR1) is —not the conclusion that theoriginal argument,
in which thearbitrary identiﬁcationsof (GLR1) were not in force, haslog-
ical ﬂaws(!), but rather — the conclusion that the contradiction obtained
in (GLR1) implies that the distinct mathematical objects that were ar-
bitrarily identiﬁed areindeed distinct, i.e., must be treated (in order, for
instance, to arrive at an accurate understanding of the original argument!)
as distinct mathematical objects!
It is most unfortunate indeed that the March discussions were insuﬃcient from
the point of view of overcoming these misunderstandings. On the other hand, my
own experience over the past six years with regard to exposing IUTch to other
mathematicians is that this sort ofshort period(roughly a week) isnever suﬃcient,
i.e., that
substantial progress in understanding IUTch always requires discussions
over anextended period of time, typically on theorder of months.
Indeed, the issue of lack of time became especially conspicuous during the afternoon
of the ﬁnal day of discussions. Typically, short periods of interaction center around
reacting in real timeand do not leave participants the time toreﬂect deeply on
various aspects of the mathematics under discussion. This sort ofdeep reﬂection,
which is absolutely necessary to achieve fundamental progress in understanding,
can only occur in situations where the participants are aﬀorded the opportunity
to think at their leisure and forget about any time or deadline factors. (In this
context, it is perhaps of interest to note that Scholze contacted me in May 2015 by
e-mail concerning a question he had regarding the non-commutativity of the log-
theta-lattice in IUTch (i.e., in eﬀect, “(Ind3)”). This contact resulted in a short
series of e-mail exchanges in May 2015, in which I addressed his (somewhat vaguely
worded) question as best I could, but this did not satisfy him at the time. On the
other hand, the March 2018 discussions centered aroundquite diﬀerent issues,s u c h
as (Ind1,2), as will be described in detail below.)
§3. On the other hand, it seems that the March discussions may in fact be regarded
as constituting substantial progress in the following sense. Prior to the March
discussions, (at least to my knowledge)
negative positions concerning IUTch were always discussed in highlynon-
mathematical terms, i.e., by focusing on various aspects of the situation
that were quite far removed from any sort ofdetailed, well-deﬁned,
mathematically substantive content.

4 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
That is to say, although it is most regrettable that it was not possible to resolve the
fundamental misunderstandings of SS during the March discussions, nevertheless,
the March discussions were highly meaningful in that, to my knowledge,
they constitute theﬁrst detailed, well-deﬁned, mathematically sub-
stantivediscussions concerningnegative positionswith regard to IUTch.
Put another way, as a result of theabsence, during the past six years, of such
detailed, well-deﬁned, mathematically substantive discussions concerning negative
positions with regard to IUTch, the highly non-mathematical tone that has
appeared, up till now, in statements by mathematicians critical of IUTch has had
the eﬀect of giving the impression that
any existing criticism of IUTch is entirely devoid of any substan-
tive mathematical content, i.e., based on entirely non-mathematical
considerations.
On the other hand, as I have emphasized on numerous occasions throughout the
past six years (cf., e.g., [Rpt2014], (7); [QC2016], (4), (5)),
the only way to make meaningful, substantive progress with regard to dif-
ferences of opinion concerning IUTch is by means of discussions concern-
ing detailed, well-deﬁned, mathematically substantive content.
From this point of view, it seems most desirable that the mathematical content
discussed in the present report be made available forfurther discussion by all in-
terested mathematicians(i.e., not just the participants in the March discussions!),
in the hope that the present report might play the role of serving to stimulate fur-
ther detailed, well-deﬁned, mathematically substantive dialogue concerning issues
related to IUTch. In this context, it seems also offundamental importanceto keep
the followinghistorical point of viewin mind:
It is only by supplementing negative positions concerning IUTch withde-
tailed, mathematically substantive, accessible recordsof the math-
ematical content underlying such negative positions that humanity can
avoid creating anunfortunate situation— i.e., of the sort that arose con-
cerning the “proof” asserted byFermat of “Fermat’s Last Theorem”!—
in which an accurate evaluation of the substantive mathematical content
underlying such negative positions willremain impossible indeﬁnitely.
Other historical examples of interest in the present context — i.e., especially from
the point of view of theexplicit documentation of the fascinating phenomenon
of transition fromsocial rejection to social acceptance of a scientiﬁc theory
— include such well-documented cases as the defense byGalileo of the theory of
heliocentrism(cf., e.g., [Gll]) and the defense byEinstein of the theory ofrelativity
(cf., e.g., [Rtv]). Again, the following (essentially tautological!) fact cannot be
overemphasized:
It is possible for us today to study in detail this fascinating process of
refutation by Galileo of various denials of the theory ofheliocentrism or
refutation byEinstein of various denials — e.g., in the form of variousal-
leged “paradoxes”—o ft h et h e o r yo frelativityprecisely because of the ex-
istence ofdetailed, explicit, accessible recordsof the logical structure

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 5
underlying arguments produced by scholars on either side of the debate,
i.e., both scholars who denied (at times with a surprising degree of hostil-
ity!) the validity of these theoriesand scholars involved in the refutation
of these denials.
Further remarks concerning the involvement of other mathematicians may be found
in §18 below.
§4. Before proceeding to our exposition of the mathematical content of the March
discussions, we pause to list brieﬂy the various topics that seem to have been the
main themesof the March discussions:
(T1) the treatment, in IUTch, ofhistories of various operations performed
on mathematical objects;
(T2) the treatment, in IUTch, of types of mathematical objects (i.e.,
“species”, in the sense of [IUTchIV],§3);
(T3) the “id-version”, i.e., a variant of IUTch obtained by identifying
various copies(such asFrobenius-likeand ´etale-like versions, as well as
copies appearing indiﬀerent Hodge theaters) of familiar objects by means
of the“identity morphism”(cf. the discussion of§2!);
(T4) opposition by SS to the use ofpoly-morphisms in IUTch
(T4-1) as a matter of taste,
(T4-2) on the grounds that the introduction of indeterminacies such as
(Ind1,2) seemed to SS to belogically unnecessaryor “mean-
ingless”;
(T5) opposition by SS to the use oflabels in IUTch to distinguishdistinct
copies of various familiar objects
(T5-1) as a matter of taste,
(T5-2) on the grounds that the use of such labels seemed to SS to be
logically unnecessaryor “meaningless”;
(T6) refusal, on the part of SS, to considervarious key ideas and no-
tions of IUTch such asdistinct arithmetic holomorphic structures(i.e., in
essence, distinct ring structures);
(T7) the issue ofsimpliﬁcation;
(T8) occasional misinterpretation by SSof statements by HM of the form
(T8-1) as deﬁnitive declarations of (T8-2):
(T8-1) “you may consider such and such a modiﬁed version of IUTch
if you wish, but it is by no means clear that the essential content
of IUTch is valid for such a modiﬁed version”,
(T8-2) “you may consider such and such a modiﬁed version of IUTch
if you wish, and, moreover, I aﬃrm that the essential content of
IUTch is completely valid for such a modiﬁed version”;

6 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(T9) detailed exposition of the multiradial representation of [IUTchIII],
Theorem 3.11.
Of these themes, it seems that (T1) and (T2) are, in some sense, the mostessential
or fundamental. Then (T3), (T4), (T5) may be understood as being essentially
“corollaries”of (T1), (T2). Moreover, (T4), (T5) may be understood as particular
aspects of (T3). By contrast, (T6), (T7), (T8) refer to certainprocedural aspects
of the March discussions, which, nonetheless, had a substantial inﬂuence on the
mathematical content of the discussions. Here, it should be mentioned that the
issue ofsimpliﬁcation mentioned in (T7) refers to the general issue of just what sort
of simpliﬁcations in the mathematical content under discussion are mathematically
correct, meaningful, and helpful (from the point of view eliminating details that are
unnecessary and irrelevant to the central points at issue). Thus,one aspectof this
general theme (T7) is theerroneous attempts by SS to simplify IUTch(cf. (T3),
(T4), (T5), (T6)) to such an extent that it leads to meaningless contradictions (as
summarized in (Smm), (GLR1), (GLR2)). On the other hand, (cf. the discussion
of §8, §13 below), (T7) also refers to situations where the techniques introduced
in IUTch actually do yield simpliﬁcations, relative to more naive approaches to
various situations that arise in IUTch. Finally, (T9) proceeded relatively smoothly,
in the sense that it consisted essentially of a straightforward exposition of the
content of the multiradial algorithms of [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11. That is to say,
the position of SS with regard to (T9) was that they did not dispute thevalidity
of these algorithms, but rather thenon-triviality,o r substantive content, of these
algorithms, on account of their positions with regard to (T1), (T2), (T3), (T4),
(T5), (T6).
§5. In some sense, it seems that thelogical starting pointof the diﬀerences in
point of view between SS and HM (and hence of variousfundamental misunder-
standings of SS) may be understood as a consequence of the diﬀerence between
the following two approaches to considering histories of operationsperformed on
mathematical objects in a given discussion of mathematics (cf. (T1)):
(H1) The conventional approach to histories of operations: The con-
ventional approach that is typically taken, with regard to histories of op-
erations performed on various mathematical objects, consists of regarding
all of these operations as beingembedded within asingle history.
•→· · ·
↗
•→•→•→ • →· · ·
↘↘
... ...
In this approach,all previously executed operationsare regarded as
being permanently accessible, regardless of the content of subsequent
operations.
(H2) The approach taken in IUTch to histories of operations: By con-
trast, the approach to treating such histories of operations that is taken

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 7
throughout IUTch involves the frequent use ofre-initialization opera-
tions (i.e., “∥”)
• → ···
↗
•→•→• ∥ • →· · ·
↘↘
... ...
— that is to say, situations where oneforgets the previous history of
some object (such as, for instance, some previously endowedmathemat-
ical structure on the object) and regards this previous history as being
inaccessible in subsequent discussions. Such re-initialization operations
then require the use ofdistinct labels(cf. (T5)) to denote the “versions”
of an object that ariseprior to and subsequent to the execution of such
re-initialization operations. Another aspect of central importance in the
context of such re-initialization operations is theexplicit speciﬁcation
of thetype of mathematical objects(i.e., “species”, in the terminol-
ogy of [IUTchIV],§3 — cf. (T2)) that one considers, for instance,prior to
and subsequent tothe execution of such re-initialization operations (e.g.,
“groups of automorphisms of some speciﬁed ﬁeld”versus “abstract topo-
logical groups”).
§6. The twomain examplesin IUTch (cf.§15 below for a slightly more detailed
— though still quite brief! — review of certain aspects of IUTch) of the sort of
re-initialization operation discussed in (H2) occur in the context of thegluing
operations that arise in the deﬁnition of thelog- and Θ-links:
(HEx1) The log-link: Here, the gluing operation consists of regarding the
“Π’s”
(i.e., in the notation of [IUTchI], Fig. I1.2; [IUTchI], Deﬁnition 3.1, (e),
(f), “Πv’s”, forv ∈V) on either side of thelog-link as being known only as
abstract topological groups, i.e., offorgetting the way in which these
abstract topological groups are conventionally related to ring/scheme the-
ory, namely, asgroups of ﬁeld automorphisms.
(HEx2) The Θ-link: Here, the gluing operation consists of portions:
(HEx2-1) regarding the
“G’s”
(i.e., in the notation of [IUTchI], Fig. I1.2; [IUTchI], Deﬁnition
3.1, (e), “Gv’s”, forv ∈V) on either side of the Θ-link as being
known only asabstract topological groups, i.e., forgetting
the way in which these abstract topological groups are conven-
tionally related to ring/scheme theory, namely, asgroups of ﬁeld
automorphisms;

8 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(HEx2-2) regarding the
“O×μ’s”
(i.e., in the notation of [IUTchI], Fig. I1.2, “O×μ
F v
’s”, forv ∈
Vnon) on either side of the Θ-link as being known only asab-
stract topological monoids(that are also equipped with cer-
tain Gv-actions, as well as certaincollections of submodules,a s
discussed in [IUTchII], Deﬁnition 4.9, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (vi),
(vii)), i.e.,forgetting the way in which these abstract topolog-
ical monoids are conventionally related to ring/scheme theory,
namely, assubquotients of multiplicative groups of certain ﬁelds.
In this context, we note that there are several diﬀerences between (HEx1) and
(HEx2-1). Indeed, in the case of the Θ-link, although “G” (cf. (HEx2-1)) isnot
regarded as a group of ﬁeld automorphisms, it is regarded as a group of auto-
morphisms of the abstract topological monoid “O×μ”(i.e., equipped with a cer-
tain collection of submodules — cf. (HEx2-2)). In particular, the Θ-link is con-
structed by considering the full poly-isomorphism between distinct copies of the
data “G ↷ O×μ”( w h e r eO×μ is always regarded as being equipped with a certain
collection of submodules). This full poly-isomorphism gives rise to theindetermi-
nacies (Ind1,2), which play a central role in IUTch. By contrast, in the case of the
log-link, the gluing between Frobenius-like data in the codomain and domain (of
the log-link) involves aspeciﬁc bijection between topological sets (arising, re-
spectively, frommultiplicative and additive structures in thedomain and codomain
of thelog-link). That is to say, (unlike the case of the Θ-link) one doesnot perform
the gluing in thelog-link by considering, say,full poly-isomorphismsbetween topo-
logical sets. A closely related fact is the fact that these topological setsare never
used as vertical cores, i.e., as invariants (up to indeterminate isomorphisms of
topological sets) with respect to thelog-link. Nevertheless, these topological sets
(regarded up to indeterminate isomorphisms of topological sets) may, in some sense,
be thought of as appearingimplicitly, in the sense that the point of view in which
one thinks of the “Π’s” asabstract topological groupsis closely related to the point
of view in which one thinks of the “Π’s” asgroups of automorphisms of these
topological sets that appear in the gluing of Frobenius-like data that occurs in
the case of thelog-link. This state of aﬀairs diﬀers somewhat from the situation
in the case of the Θ-link, in which theO×μ’s(regarded up to the indeterminacy
(Ind2)) do indeed play an important role ashorizontal cores, i.e., asinvariants
with respect to the Θ-link.
§7. Before proceeding, it is of interest to note, in the context of§5, §6, that the sort
of re-initialization operations discussed in (H2) — i.e., operations that consist of
forgetting mathematical structuresin such a way that the forgotten mathematical
structures cannot (at least in any sort ofa priori,o r general nonsense, sense) be
recovered— in fact occur in various contexts of mathematics other than IUTch. In-
deed, the following two“classical” examplesare of particular interest in the context
of IUTch:
(HC1) Classical complex Teichm¨uller theory: The fundamental set-up
of classical complex Teichm¨uller theory consists of considering distinct

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 9
holomorphic (i.e., Riemann surface) structureson a giventopological (or
real analytic) surface, i.e., of forgetting the way in which the Riemann
surface (i.e., holomorphic structure) gives rise to such a topological (or
real analytic) surface.
(HC2) Anabelian geometry: The fundamental set-up of anabelian geometry
consists of considering varioustopological (typically proﬁnite) groupsthat
arise as various types of arithmetic (i.e., ´etale) fundamental groups of
schemes or Galois groups of ﬁelds asabstract topological groups, i.e., of
forgetting the way in which such topological groups arose as arithmetic
fundamental groups or Galois groups.
Indeed, it appears thatSS did not dispute the logical feasibility or consistency of
the approach of (H2)in the context of IUTch. Rather, their main objection to
the approach of (H2) in the context of IUTch appears to be to the eﬀect that
they believed this approach of (H2) in the context of IUTch, i.e., in particular,
in the context of (HEx1), (HEx2-1), (HEx2-2), to beunnecessary/superﬂuous.I n
particular, it appears that one of thefundamental assertions of SSis to the eﬀect
that
(SSInd) the essential content (e.g., multiradial algorithms) of IUTch isentirely
unaﬀectedeven if theindeterminacies (Ind1,2) (cf. the discussion of
§6) areeliminated.
§8. The central reasonfor the introduction, in IUTch, of various types ofindeter-
minacy lies in the goal (cf. [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11) of obtainingmultiradial
algorithms for representing theΘ-pilot object, i.e., algorithms for represent-
ing the Θ-pilot object that are
(SW) compatible w i t h—t h a ti st os a y ,invariant, up to suitable indeter-
minacies, with respect to — the operation ofswitching/interchanging
corresponding collections of data (e.g., Θ-pilot objects) in thedomain and
codomain of the Θ-link, in a fashion thatﬁxes the gluing of data that
constitutes the Θ-link.
This switching property(SW), i.e.,multiradiality, may also be thought of as a sort of
symmetry between certain data in thedomain and codomainof the Θ-link. This
sort of symmetry is achieved precisely by introducing variousindeterminacies —
i.e., via the operation of“re-initialization”, or “forgetting certain mathematical
structures”, as discussed in (H2). That is to say,
(Sym) unlike the very rigid history diagrams discussed in (H1), i.e., where
one doesnot allow oneself to perform re-initialization operations, history
diagrams such as those in (H2), i.e., diagrams that include re-initialization
operations “∥” (which typically give rise to certainindeterminacies!),
are much more ﬂexible/less rigid, hence have farfewer obstructions
to admitting symmetries.
Put another way, the re-initialization operations “∥” in history diagrams such as
those in (H2) may be visualized asﬂexible/rotary joints — such as those in the
human skeletonor inrobot arms— whose ﬂexibility renders possible various types

10 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
of symmetry. Perhaps the most fundamental example of this sort of phenomenon
is the following very classical/elementary example:
(SWC1) Consider theordered setE = {0,1}, equipped with the ordering “0< 1”.
Then the operation
E ↦→ S
given byforgetting the ordering, i.e., passing fromordered setsto under-
lying sets, gives rise to an object “S” (i.e., a set of cardinality 2) that
admits symmetries (i.e., the symmetric group on 2 letters!) that may
only be considered if onecompletely forgets the orderingon “E”!
Another observation of fundamental importancein the present context is the follow-
ing: Although at ﬁrst glance, the introduction ofre-initialization operationsas in
(H2), together with the resultingindeterminacies, may appear to give rise to math-
ematical structures that are more complicated (cf. the “issue ofsimpliﬁcation”, i.e.,
(T7)!) than the mathematical structures that arise in rigid history diagrams of the
sort discussed in (H1), in fact,
re-initialization operations — i.e., operations of forgetting mathemat-
ical structures that obstruct desired symmetries — typically yield
mathematicalstructuresthatare much simpler/more tractable/more
likely to admit symmetries, in that they allow one to concentrate on
structures of interest while carrying aroundmuch less “unnecessary
baggage”!
This sort of phenomenon — i.e., achievingsimplicity by forgetting!—m a yb e
seen innumerous classical/elementary examples, such as the following one:
(SWC2) Consider the geometry oftopological manifolds, i.e., which involves vari-
ous continuous maps between topological manifolds. At ﬁrst glance, con-
sidering topological manifolds equipped with atlases, i.e., equipped with
systems of local coordinates that yield local embeddings into some Eu-
clidean space, may appear to be“simpler”mathematical structures (i.e.,
than topological manifolds that are not equipped with atlases) in that
they contain speciﬁc data that relates such a topological manifold toEu-
cidean space, whose geometry is more explicit and easier to graspthan
the geometry of an arbitrary topological manifold. In fact, however, the
operation of forgetting atlases, i.e., of regarding topological manifolds as
not necessarily being equipped with explicit atlases, yields mathemati-
cal structures that are muchsimpler/more tractable/more likely to
admit symmetries, especially, for instance, when one considers various
continuous maps between topological manifolds(which are not necessarily
compatible with given atlases in the domain and codomain!), than the
geometries/mathematical structures that arise if oneinsists (e.g., in the
name of “simplicity”— cf. (T7)!) on considering topological manifolds
equipped with atlases.
In the context of IUTch, thetwo main examplesof this general mathematical phe-
nomenon are the following (cf. also the discussion of§15 below for more details):

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 11
(SWE1) (Frobenius-like) ring structures surrounding the log-link (cf.
(HEx1)): The usual “Galois-theoretic”relationship (i.e., via the inter-
pretation as agroup of ﬁeld automorphisms) with the ring/ﬁeld structures
in the domains and codomains of thelog-links in asingle vertical lineof
the log-theta-lattice of the
“Π’s”
that appear in such a vertical line is a mathematical structure that isfar
from beingsymmetric with respect toswitchingoperations between the
two vertical lines (in the log-theta-lattice) that appear on either side of a
Θ-link (cf. (LbMn) below). On the other hand, such aswitching sym-
metry may be achieved precisely byforgetting about these (Frobenius-
like) ring/ﬁeld structures, i.e., by thinking of the various “Π’s” asab-
stract topological groups— cf. (HEx1), as well as (EtMn) below.
(SWE2) (Frobenius-like) ring structures surrounding the Θ-link (cf.
(HEx2)): In a similar vein, the usual “Galois-theoretic”relationship
(i.e., via the interpretation as agroup of ﬁeld automorphisms)w i t ht h e
r i n g / ﬁ e l ds t r u c t u r e si nt h ed o m a i na n dc o d o m a i no faΘ - l i n ko ft h e
“G’s”
that appear in the domain and codomain of a Θ-link, as well as the usual
relationship — i.e., relative to the local and globalvalue groupportions
of the gluing data that appears in a Θ-link — with the ring/ﬁeld structures
in the domain and codomain of a Θ-link of the
“O×μ’s”
that appear in the domain and codomain of a Θ-link, are mathematical
structures that arefar from beingsymmetric with respect toswitching
operations between the domain and codomain of the Θ-link (cf. (LbΘ) be-
low). On the other hand, such aswitching symmetrymay be achieved
precisely by forgetting about these (Frobenius-like) ring/ﬁeld structures,
i.e., by thinking of the various “G’s” asabstract topological groups
and of the various “O×μ’s” asabstract topological monoids(equipped
with certain collections of submodules), that is to say, by introducing the
indeterminacies (Ind1,2) — cf. (HEx2), as well as (VUC), (EtΘ) below.
§9. The gluing (poly-)isomorphism constituted by the Θ-link may be thought
of, in essence, as a(n) (poly-)isomorphism between collections of data as follows:
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
G
↷
{qj2
}N ·O ×μ
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
full
∼
→
poly-
isom.
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
G
↷
qN ·O×μ
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
Θ-hol. str. q-hol. str.

12 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
—w h e r et h e“j”i n“{−}”v a r i e sf r o m1t ol⋇ def
= 1
2(l−1) (cf. the notation of, e.g.,
[Alien], §3.3, (vii), as well as the notation of the abovediscussion). Onefundamental
aspectof IUTch is the following observation:
(ΘNR) The gluing isomorphism constituted by the Θ-link isnot compatible
withthe ring structures—i.e., doesnotarisefroma ring homomorphism
relative to the ring structures — on the algebraic closures of local ﬁelds
“k’s”
(i.e., in the notation of the discussion surrounding [IUTchI], Fig. I1.2,
“Fv’s”, forv ∈V) that lie on either side of the Θ-link. We shall refer
to these ring structures on either side of the Θ-link by the terms “Θ-
holomorphic structure”and “ q-holomorphic structure”(and ab-
breviate the lengthy term “arithmetic holomorphic structure” by “hol.
str.”). Here, from the point of view of the data in large parentheses “(−)”
in the ﬁrst display of the present§9, the“ring structures”under consid-
eration may be thought of as consisting of the following three structures:
(ΘNR1) the additive structureon (each)k,
(ΘNR2) the multiplicative structureon (each)k,
(ΘNR3) the “Galois-theoretic interpretation”of each “G” as a group of
ﬁeld automorphisms of the corresponding “k”.
On the other hand, in the present context, it is important to recall that
(GIUT) the central goal of IUTch is precisely to compute the Θ-hol. str.
in terms of the q-hol. str. (where we regard these two hol. strs. —
i.e., ring structures— as being related via the gluing (poly-)isomorphism
constituted by the Θ-link).
From the point of view ofimplementing (GIUT) via themultiradial representa-
tion algorithmsdeveloped in IUTch(i.e., [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11), the following
property is ofcentral importance:
(ΘCR) The Θ-link is deﬁned in such a way as to be compatible with as
large a portion of thering structureson either side of the Θ-link (i.e.,
the Θ-,q-hol. strs.) as is possible. These ring structures are necessary
in order to deﬁne the respective log-links associated to the Θ-,q-hol.
strs.; the use of theselog-links is anessential portionof themultiradial
representation algorithms developed in IUTch. Here, the “portion”
of these ring structures thatis compatible with the Θ-link consists of the
following two structures:
(ΘCR1) the subquotients (equipped with certain collections of sub-
modules) of the multiplicative monoid k
×
(i.e., of nonzero
elements of the ring k) given by the monoids “{qj2
}N ·O ×μ”,
“qN ·O×μ”;
(ΘCR2) the“interpretation”of each “G” as a group ofautomorphisms of
the monoids considered in (ΘCR1) — an “interpretation” which,
in this case, just happens to be equivalent to simply thinking of
each “G”a sa nabstract topological group.

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 13
Note, moreover, that (ΘCR1), (ΘCR2) areconsistent with the approach
to switching symmetrization discussed in (SWE2), hence give rise to the
indeterminacies (Ind1,2).
Here, it is important to note that, although thesplittings
{qj2
}N ·O ×μ ∼
→{ qj2
}N ×O ×μ; qN ·O ×μ ∼
→ qN ×O ×μ
might, at ﬁrst glance, give the impression that the“value group portions”{qj2
}N,
qN and “unit group portions”O×μ are treated (in the gluing (poly-)isomorphism
that constitutes the Θ-link) asindependent, unrelated objects, in fact this issimply
not the case.T h a ti st os a y :
(VUSQ) These splittings exist merely as a consequence of the (simple!)monoid
structure of the particular monoids involved. The observation ofcentral
importance, from the point of view of (ΘCR), is that theentire monoid
“{qj2
}N ·O×μ” (respectively, “qN ·O×μ”) — i.e., which containsboth the
“value group portion”and “unit group portion”discussed above
—i sa subquotient of the single multiplicative monoidk
×
(i.e., of
nonzero elements) that arises from thering k.
At a somewhat more concrete level, the above discussion may be summarized as
follows:
(VUC) In the following, we use left-hand superscripts “0” and “1” to denote,
respectively, objects in thedomain and codomainof variousmodiﬁed ver-
sions of theΘ-link:
(VUC1) Consider the modiﬁed version of theΘ-link
{0qj2
}N ·0O×μ ∼
→ 1qN ·1O×μ
in which {0qj2
} ↦→ 1q, and one takes the (poly-)isomorphism
0O×μ ∼
→ 1O×μ to be the“identity isomorphism”, i.e., the
isomorphism arising from some ﬁxed choice of (“rigidifying”) iso-
morphisms of both sides with some ﬁxed“model” copyof O×μ
arising from a ﬁxed “model” copyof k. This “identity iso-
morphism”0O×μ ∼
→ 1O×μ is thenequivariant with respect to
some (uniquely determined) isomorphism of topological groups
0G
∼
→ 1G. The rigidifying isomorphisms just mentioned de-
terimine, by applying the elementary construction reviewed in
(RLFU) below to the invariants ofiO×μ with respect to various
open subgroups of iG,f o ri =0 ,1, an “identity isomorphism”
0k
∼
→ 1k. This “identity isomorphism”0k
∼
→ 1k is incompat-
ible with the assignment{0qj2
}N ↦→ 1q in the sense that, for
j =2 ,...,l ⋇, this “identity isomorphism”0k
∼
→ 1k does not
map 0k ∋ 0qj2
↦→ 1q ∈1k.
(VUC2) The incompatibilitydiscussed in (VUC1) may beeliminated by
regarding 0qj2
(for j =1 ,...,l ⋇) as belonging to yet another
copy “0′
k”of k that is regarded asnot being related to0k via a

14 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
ﬁeld isomorphism (and, for the sake of “symmetry”, regarding
1q as belonging toyet another copy “1′
k”of k that is regarded
as not being related to1k via a ﬁeld isomorphism) — cf. the dis-
cussion above of the issue of treating the“value group portions”
{qj2
}N, qN and “unit group portions”O×μ as independent, un-
related objects. This approach to eliminating the incompatibility
discussed in (VUC1) isnot the approachadopted in IUTch.
(VUC3) On the other hand, one may alsoeliminate the incompatibil-
ity discussed in (VUC1) by abandoning the “identity isomor-
phism”and considering instead the (“full”) poly-isomorphism
given by the collection ofall isomorphisms of topological monoids
(equipped with certain collections of submodules)
{0qj2
}N ·0O×μ ∼
→ 1qN ·1O×μ
that areequivariant with respect to some (uniquely determined)
isomorphism of topological groups0G
∼
→ 1G.T h esigniﬁcance
of this approach (cf. (VUSQ)!) lies in the fact that it involves
isomorphisms between a single subquotient {0qj2
}N · 0O×μ of
(copies indexed by labelsj of) the topological monoid0k
×
and
a single subquotient 1qN ·1O×μ of the topological monoid1k
×
.
This is the approach that isactually adopted in IUTch.
Finally, we review a certain elementary construction that was applied in the above
discussion:
(RLFU) Reconstruction of p-adic local ﬁelds from groups of units:L e tK
be a ﬁnite extension of the ﬁeld ofp-adic numbersQp.W r i t eOK ⊆K for
the ring of integers ofK, O×
K ⊆OK for the group of units ofOK, O×μ
K for
the quotient ofO×
K by its torsion subgroup,WK
def
= O×μ
K ⊗Q (where the
tensor product is taken with respect to themultiplicativemodule structure
on O×μ
K ), MK
def
= p2 ·OK ⊆OK, UK
def
=1 + MK ⊆O×
K. Thus, one veriﬁes
immediately that the natural composite mapUK ⊆O×
K ↠ O×μ
K ↪→ WK
determines an injection UK ↪→ WK, whose image we denote byVK (so
we obtain a natural isomorphismγK : UK
∼
→ VK). Next, let us observe
that by considering thenatural surjection UK × UK ↠ MK that maps
UK × UK ∋ (u,v) ↦→ u −v ∈MK, one may think of theset MK as a
quotient set of the product setUK × UK, hence also (by applyingγ−1
K )
of the product setVK ×VK. In particular, one may think of theadditive
structureon the moduleMK as a binary operation on some quotient of the
product setVK ×VK. Moreover, by observing that (u1 −v1)·(u2 −v2)=
(u1·u2−u1·v2)+(v1·v2−v1·u2), whereu1,v1,u2,v2 ∈UK, one concludes
that this additive structure onMK (regarded as a quotient ofVK ×VK!),
together with themultiplicative structureon VK, allows one to reconstruct
the multiplicative structureon MK (i.e., the multiplicative structure that
arises by restricting the multiplicative structure onOK to MK ⊆OK).
Thus, in summary, by thinking ofK as MK ⊗Q, we conclude that:

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 15
Suppose that we are given an arbitrarytopological group†W,t o -
gether with anisomorphism of topological groupsα: †W
∼
→ WK.
Then we obtain aconstruction
(†W,α) ↦→ †K
of a topological ﬁeld †K that is functorial in the pair (†W,α)
(i.e., consisting of a topological group and an isomorphism of
topological groups).
Indeed, αdetermines
· a subgroup†V
def
= α−1(VK) ⊆†W;
· a quotient set†M of the product set†V ×†V, together with a
natural bijection†M
∼
→ MK that is compatible with the bijection
†V ×†V
∼
→ VK ×VK determined byα;
· an additive structure on †M such that the natural bijection
†M
∼
→ MK is compatible with the respective additive structures;
· a multiplicative structure on †M such that the natural bijec-
tion †M
∼
→ MK is compatible with the respective multiplicative
structures;
· a topological ﬁeld structureon †K
def
= †M ⊗Q such that the
natural bijection †M
∼
→ MK induces an isomorphism†K
∼
→ K
of topological ﬁelds.
The functoriality of this construction (†V,α) ↦→ †K is a tautological con-
sequence of the construction.
§10. During the afternoon session of the ﬁnal day of the March discussions, SS made
the following assertion, which may be thought of as a sort ofconcrete realizationof
their assertion (SSInd):
(SSId) The multiradial algorithms of IUTch may be applied to relate the Θ-,
q-hol. strs. that appear in the following“id-version”(cf. (T3)) of the
Θ-link
{qj2
}N
−−−−−−−−−
(
G ↷ O×μ
)
“identity”
∼
→
isom. on
G, O×μ
qN
−−−−−−−−−
(
G ↷ O×μ
)
Θ-hol. str. q-hol. str.
—w h e r et h e“−−” on either side of the “
∼
→ ” are intended as a notational
device to document the understanding that thering structure that gives
rise to the (“value group”) monoid “{qj2
}N” (respectively, “qN”)is to
be regarded as distinct and unrelated to the ring str. — i.e., the Θ-
(respectively, q-) hol. str. — that gives rise to the data “G ↷ O×μ”o n
the same side of the “
∼
→ ” (cf. (VUC2)!).
Here, we observe that one may introduceterminology “†Θ-hol. str.”(respectively,
“†q-hol. str.”)t od e n o t et h ering structure that gives rise to the (“value group”)

16 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
monoid “{qj2
}N” (respectively, “qN”).( S Sdeeply objected to discussingand, indeed,
refused to consider(cf. (T6)) these ring structures, on the grounds that they wished
to keep the discussion as “simple” (cf. (T7)) as possible — cf. also (T8), the
discussion of (T7) in §8.) From the point of view of this terminology, the“id-
version”of the Θ-link discussed in (SSId) may be described via the diagram
⎛
⎝
G
↷
{qj2
}N ·O ×μ
⎞
⎠
†Θ-hol. str.
−−−−−−−−−
(
G ↷ O×μ
)
Θ-hol. str.
“identity”
∼
→
isom. on
G, O×μ
⎛
⎝
G
↷
qN ·O ×μ
⎞
⎠
†q-hol. str.
−−−−−−−−−
(
G ↷ O×μ
)
q-hol. str.
—w h e r et h e“
∼
→ ” only relates thevalue group portionsof the†Θ-,†q-hol. strs.,
i.e., it relates (via the “identity” isomorphism) the “G ↷ O×μ” portions of the
Θ-,q-hol. strs., but doesnot relate the “G ↷ O×μ” portions of the†Θ-,†q-hol.
strs. It appears that SS introduced the (mathematical content represented by the)
“−−’s”
(SSId1) precisely in order to ensure that the“id-version” of theΘ-link discussed
in (SSId) satisﬁes theswitching property(SW) (cf. also (VUC2)).
Moreover, it appears that SS felt justiﬁed in introducing the “−−’s” precisely as a
consequence of themisunderstanding, on the part of SS, that
(SSId2) the “value group portions”{qj2
}N, qN and “unit group portions”O×μ are
treated (in the gluing (poly-)isomorphism that constitutes the Θ-link) as
independent, unrelated objects(cf. the discussion immediately preceding
(VUSQ); the discussion of (VUC)).
On the other hand, onefundamental propertyof this“id-version”of the Θ-link
is the following:
(†ΘCR) The multiradial algorithms of IUTchonly may be appliedto relate the
value group portion of the†Θ-hol. str. to the value group portion of
some other hol. str. that islinked to the †Θ-hol. str. via data that
contains the “G ↷ O×μ” portion of the†Θ-hol. str. (cf. (ΘCR),
(VUSQ), (VUC)). That is to say, the multiradial algorithms of IUTch
cannot be applied(cf. (ΘCR), (VUSQ), (VUC)) in such a way that the
“G ↷ O×μ” that appears in these algorithms may be taken to be the
rigidiﬁed “G ↷ O×μ” portion of the Θ-,q-hol. strs. of (SSId) (i.e.,
which isnot subject to the indeterminacies(Ind1,2)!).
In particular,
(SSIdFs) the assertion (SSId) isfalse, i.e., in summary, the use of “−−”t oe n s u r e
that (SW) is satisﬁed (cf. (SSId1))tautologicallygives rise tofundamen-
tal obstacles to satisfying (ΘCR) (cf. also (VUSQ), (VUC), (SSId2)),
hence also with respect to implementing (GIUT).

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 17
In this context, we remark that one way to understand theessential logical struc-
ture of the problem with the“id-version” of theΘ-link discussed in (SSId) is to
consider the following elementary example concerningc o m p l e xs t r u c t u r e so nr e a l
vector spaces:
(SSIdEx) Write V = R2 (i.e., a copy of two-dimensional Euclidean space),e1
def
=
(1,0) ∈V, e2
def
=( 0,1) ∈V, V1
def
= R · e1, V2
def
= R · e2.L e tt< 1b ea
positive real number. Consider the following twocomplex structures(i.e.,
structures as a vector space over the ﬁeld of complex numbersC)o nV:
· the “U-structure”: i·e1 = e2, i·e2 = −e1;
· the “W-structure”: i·e1 = t·e2, i·e2 = −t−1 ·e1.
Thus, theU-, W-structures determine, respectively,complex vector spaces
U, W whose underlying real vector spaceis V.W r i t eφ: U
∼
→ W for the
isomorphism of real vector spacesarising from the fact that the underlying
real vector space ofU, W is V.F o ri =1 ,2, writeUi ⊆U, Wi ⊆W for the
real subspaces determined byVi ⊆V and φi : Ui
∼
→ Wi for the restriction
of φto Ui. In the following, we shall use a subscript “C”t od e n o t et h e
tensor product overR with C.W r i t e
ιU : U2
∼
→ i·U1 ⊆(U1)C
for theR-linear morphism that mapse2 ↦→ i·e1,
ιW : W2
∼
→ i·W1 ⊆(W1)C
for theR-linear morphism that mapst·e2 ↦→ i·e1. Thus, one may think
of ιU as the restriction toU2 of the uniqueC-linear isomorphism
ζU : U
∼
→ (U1)C
that restricts to the identity onU1; one may think ofιW as the restriction
to W2 of the uniqueC-linear isomorphism
ζW : W
∼
→ (W1)C
that restricts to the identity on W1. Next, let us consider the gluing
isomorphism of collections of data
Φ
def
=( φ,φ1,φ2,e1 ↦→ e1,e2 ↦→ e2):
(U,U1,U2,e1 ∈U1,e2 ∈U2)
∼
→ (W,W1,W2,e1 ∈W1,e2 ∈W2)
— where each collection of data consists of theunderlying real vector space
associated to some complex vector space, together withtwo real subspaces
oftherealvectorspaceand distinguished elementsofeachofthesubspaces.
Now suppose that one attempts to
approach the issue of understanding therelationship between
the complex structures of U, W by identifying U, W with
(U1)C, (W1)C via ζU, ζW.

18 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
This approachthen encounters variousfundamental diﬃculties, as follows:
First of all,
(̸∼=) the collections of data ( U,U1,U2,e1 ∈U1,e2 ∈U2,ζU)a n d
(W,W1,W2,e1 ∈W1,e2 ∈W2,ζW) — or, essentially equiva-
lently, the collections of data (U,U1,U2,e1 ∈U1,e2 ∈U2,ιU)
and (W,W1,W2,e1 ∈W1,e2 ∈W2,ιW) — (where each collection
of data consists of theunderlying real vector space associated to
some complex vector space, together withtwo real subspacesof
the real vector space,distinguished elementsof each of the sub-
space, and alinear morphism between real vector spaces)a r enot
isomorphic.
(Indeed, (φ1)C ◦ιU ̸= ιW ◦φ2, where we note that theR-linear morphisms
φ1 andφ2 aredeterminedbytherespectiveimages, viathesemorphisms, of
the distinguished elements. Also, we recall thatιU = ζU|U2, ιW = ζW|W2.)
Of course, one canmodify the collections of data that appear in (̸∼=)b y
regarding, fori =1 ,2, Ui, Wi as independent real vector spaces—w h i c h ,
to avoid confusion, we shall denote by [Ui], [Wi], respectively — that are
not equippedwith their respective inclusions intoU, W. It then follows
tautologically from the deﬁnition of “[−]”that we obtain anisomorphism
of (ordered) pairs
[Φ] = ([φ1],[φ2],e1 ↦→ e1,e2 ↦→ e2):
([U1],[U2],e1 ∈[U1],e2 ∈[U2])
∼
→ ([W1],[W2],e1 ∈[W1],e2 ∈[W2])
— where each pair consists of two real vector spaces,e a c ho fw h i c hi s
equipped with adistinguished element. On the other hand,
(Dilat) working with [Φ] and thinking ofU, W as being identiﬁed
with (U1)C,( W1)C by means ofζU, ζW does not allow one to
compute thenonzero dilatationof the“quasiconformal map”
φ: U
∼
→ W
by replacing φby theC-linear (i.e., complex holomorphic!) map
(φ1)C :( U1)C
∼
→ (W1)C
by means ofζU, ζW, i.e., whosedilatation is zero.
Relative to the analogy with IUTch:
· V1 corresponds to theunit group portionof thegluing datathat
appears in the Θ-link;
· V2 corresponds to the value group portionof the gluing data
that appears in the Θ-link;
· the “U-structure”corresponds to theq-hol. str.;
· the “W-structure”corresponds to the Θ-hol. str.;
· the property(̸∼=) corresponds to (VUC1);
· the gluing isomorphism [Φ] corresponds to thegluing isomor-
phism that appears in the“id-version” of theΘ-link discussed in

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 19
(SSId) (cf. (VUC2));
· the gluing isomorphism Φ corresponds to thegluing isomor-
phism that appears in the Θ-link (cf. (VUC3));
· the property(Dilat) corresponds to (SSIdFs).
In the context of IUTch, it is also perhaps of interest to observe that theessen-
tial mathematical content of this (very elementary!) example (SSIdEx) may, by
introducing slightly more sophisticated (but still very classical!) terminology, be
interpreted in terms of the well-known classical theory ofmoduli of complex elliptic
curves:
(ModEll) (Holomorphic moduli of elliptic curves vs. Teichm¨uller moduli
of elliptic curves): There are two classical approaches to understanding
the moduli of complex elliptic curves:
(HolMod) One may start with aﬁxed copy“C”o ft h eﬁeld of complex
numbers(or, essentially equivalently, with a one-dimensionalC-
vector space) and think of an elliptic curve overC as aquotient
of C by a lattice
C/(Z+Z·τ)
—w h e r et h e“period”τ∈C is a complex number whose imag-
inary part Im(τ) > 0. This approach to elliptic curves overC
allows one to think of elliptic curves overC in terms of holo-
morphic moduli. Then:
· From the point of view of the natural interpretation, in terms
of inﬁnitesimal moduli, of the ﬁrst cohomology module of the
(trivial!) tangentbundleofanellipticcurveover C, thisapproach
corresponds to computing this ﬁrst cohomology module via the
holomorphic de Rham complex.
· From the point of view of the discussion of (SSIdEx), this ap-
proach — which centers aroundﬁxing ac o p y“C”o ft h eﬁeld
of complex numbers! — corresponds to the gluing isomor-
phism [Φ], i.e., to thinking in terms of the identiﬁcations via the
C-linear (hence, in particular, holomorphic!) isomorphisms
(U1)C
∼
→ (V1)C
∼
→ (W1)C, together with anadditional, auxiliary
datum “t−1 · i · e1” (which corresponds to takingτ
def
= t−1 · i in
the present discussion).
· In particular, this approach corresponds to the thegluing iso-
morphism that appears in the“id-version” of theΘ-link dis-
cussed in (SSId) (cf. (VUC2)).
(TchMod) One may start with aﬁxed lattice
Λ
def
= Z⊕Z (⊆ΛR
def
= R⊕R)
and think of an elliptic curve overC as aholomorphic struc-
ture on this ﬁxed lattice Λ (i.e., on the ﬁxed real vector space

20 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
ΛR). Thus, for instance, the holomorphic structure given by
i·(1,0) = (0,t) corresponds to taking the “τ” in (HolMod) to be
t−1 · i.T h i s (non-holomorphic, quasi-conformal/real analytic!)
approach to elliptic curves overC is the approach taken in clas-
sical complex Teichm¨uller theory. Then:
· From the point of view of the natural interpretation, in terms
of inﬁnitesimal moduli, of the ﬁrst cohomology module of the
(trivial!) tangentbundleofanellipticcurveover C, thisapproach
corresponds to computing this ﬁrst cohomology module via the
Dolbeault complex.
· From the point of view of the discussion of (SSIdEx), this ap-
proach — which centers aroundﬁxing the lattice “Λ⊆Λ
R”!
— corresponds to the gluing isomorphism Φ, i.e., to thinking
in terms of the identiﬁcations via theR-linear (i.e., quasicon-
formal, non-holomorphic!) isomorphisms U
∼
→ V
∼
→ W be-
tween the underlying real vector spaces of various complex vector
spaces.
· In particular, this approach corresponds to thegluing isomor-
phism that appears in the Θ-link (cf. (VUC3)).
Before proceeding, it is perhaps worthwhile to recall that,historically,
(HstMod) of these two approaches discussed in (ModEll), the “holomorphic ap-
proach”(HolMod)hasbeenthe “preferred approach”in(scheme-theoretic)
arithmetic geometry, presumably becauseholomorphic structuresmay
be related very directly to algebraic/scheme-theoretic structures,
whereas the central roleplayed in the“quasiconformal approach”(Tch-
Mod) by consideration of thetwo underlying dimensions of a holo-
morphic structure did not, prior to the appearance of IUTch (cf. also
the Introduction to [AbsTopIII]), have any evident analogue in arithmetic
geometry.
Finally, in this context, it should be pointed out that SS only arrived at (SSId),
as formulated above, during the afternoon session of the ﬁnal day of the March
discussions preciselyas a consequence of the fact that the details of the formulation
of their “id-version”evolved substantiallyover the course of the March discussions.
For instance, the introduction of “−−” in (SSId) arose precisely from the discussion
of(SW),(Sym)(cf. (SSId1)), whichinturnaroseasaconsequenceofthediscussions
on previous days summarized in§5, §6, §7. This state of aﬀairs suggests that if the
March discussions had continued further (perhaps after a period of rest, to allow
the participants to digest the course of the previous discussions), it is quite possible
that further discussion of (ΘCR) could have resulted in acommon understanding
(i.e., as summarized in (SSIdFs)) concerning (SSId) (cf. the discussion following
(GLR2)).
§11. In the context of the discussion of§10, it is important to remember that:

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 21
(ΘFrd) The data that appears in the Θ-link containsglobal realiﬁed Frobe-
nioids, i.e., certain globalized versions of the local value group portions
“{qj2
}N”, “qN” whose purpose is to category-theoretically encode the no-
tion of theglobal arithmetic degreeof an arithmetic line bundle (cf.,
e.g., [Alien],§3.3, (vii)). In particular, themultiradial representation
algorithms developed in IUTch (i.e., [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11), as well
as theinequalities derived by applying these algorithms, are phenomena
that areessentially global in nature — i.e.,not just a sort of result of
summing up essentially local phenomena(cf. the discussion of [IUTchIII],
Remarks 3.6.2; 3.10.1; 3.12.2, (v)).
In particular, the compatibility of themultiradial representation algorithmsdevel-
oped in IUTch (i.e., [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11) with the correspondence in the
Θ-link
{qj2
}N ∼
→ qN
cannot be ascribed solely to purely local indeterminaciessuchas(Ind1 ,2,3).
For instance:
(ΘInd) This compatibility cannot be understood as being a consequence of the ex-
istence of automorphisms appearing in(Ind1,2) that permute the elements
of “O×μ” determined by local units of the form
{exp(qj2
)}, exp(q)
(where j =1 ,...,l ⋇).
(Indeed, ingeneral, suchautomorphismsdo not exist!) Thisessentially global nature
of the logical structure of IUTchhas apparently been a source of misunderstanding
for some mathematicians. In this context, it is perhaps of interest to recall the fol-
lowing well-known examples ofnon-isomorphic (but comparable!) mathematical
structures that have isomorphic underlying structures, but whichcannot be trans-
formed into one anotherby means of isomorphisms of the underlying structures:
(UnEx1) Classical complex Teichm¨uller theory: (cf. (HC1)) It is well-known
and easy to see that there existnon-isomorphic compact Riemann sur-
faceswhoseassociatedunderlying topological (or real analytic) surfacesare
isomorphic, but whose respectiveholomorphic structures cannot be trans-
formedinto one another by conjugating by some isomorphism between the
associated underlying topological (or real analytic) surfaces.
(UnEx2) Group structures on a set: It is easy to see (for instance, in the case
of groups of order four!) that there existnon-isomorphic groups whose
associated underlying sets are isomorphic (i.e., of the same cardinality),
but whose respectivegroup structures cannot be transformedinto one an-
other by conjugating by some isomorphism (i.e., bijective map) between
the associated underlying sets.
(UnEx3) Absolute Galois groups of p-adic local ﬁelds:L e tK be a ﬁnite
extension of the ﬁeld ofp-adic numbersQp, K an algebraic closure ofK,
GK
def
= Gal(K/K). Write K× for multiplicative group of nonzero ele-
ments ofK, Gab
K for the abelianization of the proﬁnite groupGK.T h e n

22 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
we recall that thereciprocity mapof local class ﬁeld theoryyields a natural
embedding K× ↪→ Gab
K , whose image may be reconstructed via a purely
group-theoretic algorithmfrom GK (cf., e.g., the discussion at the begin-
ning of [Alien],§2.12). Thus, by considering theadditive structure (i.e.,
arising from the additive structure of the ﬁeldK) on the union with{0} of
the image of this embeddingK× ↪→ Gab
K , one may think of theﬁeld K as
an “auxiliary structure[K]”on the proﬁnite groupGK. In particular, one
may think of the proﬁnite groupGK as anunderlying structureassociated
to the pair (GK,[K]) (consisting of a topological groupand an additive
structure, as just described) . Now letL be a ﬁnite extension of the ﬁeld
of p-adic numbersQp, L an algebraic closure ofL, GL
def
= Gal(L/L). We
use similar notation for objects related toL to the notation introduced
above for objects related toK. Then recall (cf., [Ymgt], §2, Theorem)
that there exist cases ofK and L such that
K is not isomorphic(as a ﬁeld) toL, butGK is isomorphic(as
a proﬁnite group) toGL.
Thus, it follows formally that the pairs (GK,[K]) and (GL,[L]) are not
isomorphic, but their“underlying topological groups”GK and GL are iso-
morphic. In particular, the pairs (GK,[K]) and (GL,[L]) cannot be trans-
formedinto one another by conjugating by some isomorphism between the
underlying proﬁnite groupsGK and GL.
§12. During the afternoon session of the ﬁnal day of the March discussions, SS
proceeded to derive from the“id-version”of (SSId) a“contradiction”concerning
arithmetic degrees (cf. (Smm)). This “contradiction” essentially amounts to the
following assertion:
(AD) The correspondence that appears in the Θ-link
{qj2
} ↦→ q
(where j =1 ,...,l ⋇) is, when considered within/relative to a single
hol. str., i.e., asingle ring/scheme theory, manifestly incompati-
ble/inconsistent with computingarithmetic degrees, unless one con-
siders arithmetic degrees up to theindeterminacy given by possible mul-
tiplication by factors “j2”(wherej =1 ,...,l ⋇)—anindeterminacywhich
then renders the computationmeaningless.
Before proceeding further, it should beemphasized that:
(IUAD) There is absolutely no dispute whatsoever (between SS and HM)
with respect to the validity of the assertion (AD). Indeed, the point is
that the situation in (AD) occurs whenever one workswithin a single
hol. str./ring theory. Moreover, this observation (AD) isby no means
a new observation, but rather constitutes thestarting point of IUTch.
It is precisely for this reason (cf. (GLR2)!) that, in IUTch, one must treat
the hol. strs. in the domain and codomain of the Θ-link asdistinct hol.
strs. that are related in a nontrivial way that may be only be elucidated
by means of a nontrivial computation (cf. (GIUT)).

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 23
Moreover, in the present context, it is offundamental importanceto recall that:
(ADItw) Computations of arithmetic degrees of global arithmetic line bundles that
are related to one anothervia theΘ-link depend, in an essential way,o n
the speciﬁcation of aparticular relationship,o r“intertwining”, between
the “value group portions”{qj2
}N, qN and “unit group portions”O×μ of
the data that appears in the gluing (poly-)isomorphism that constitutes
the Θ-link. Such“intertwinings”arise from thehol. strs. (i.e., ring struc-
tures) in the domain and codomain of the Θ-link, but (sincethe Θ-link is
not a ring homomorphism!) the Θ-linkfails, a priori,t ob ecompatible
with thedistinct ring structuresin its domain and codomain, hence also
with arithmetic degree computationsin its domain and codomain.
When discussing (AD), SS, at times, asserted that:
(SSAD) The “contradiction” of (AD) occurseven if one does not invoke (SSId),
i.e., even if one applies the multiradial algorithms of IUTch as stated in
[IUTchIII] (that is to say, without necessarily invoking the assertion that
these algorithms may be applied to some sort of“id-version”as in (SSId)).
On the other hand, it should bestated unequivocallythat:
(SSADFs) The assertion of (SSAD) isfalse. That is to say, the “contradiction” of
(AD) only occurswhen one identiﬁes the hol. strs./ring theories in
the domain and codomain of the Θ-link (cf. (ADItw)).
Unfortunately, whenever I tried to explain (SSADFs) during the afternoon session
of the ﬁnal day of the March discussions, for instance, by usingdistinct labelsto
denote thedistinct hol. strs./ring theoriesin the domain and codomain of the
Θ-link, SS stubbornlyrefused to allow the use of such distinct labelsin the
discussion (cf. (T5); (T6); (T8); the discussion of (T6) in§10). On the other hand,
it should be stated clearly that:
(SSDLFs) Deleting the labels used in IUTch (i.e., as formulated in [IUTchI],
[IUTchII], [IUTchIII]) to denote the distinct hol. strs./ring theo-
ries in the domain and codomain of the Θ-link amounts to identify-
ing/confusing these distinct hol. strs./ring theories — an operation
that is alreadystronger than (i.e., “implies, in particular, the content
of”) the operations discussed in (SSInd) (cf. also the discussion of§5, §6,
§7) and (SSId), i.e., operations which already lead to situations in which
the multiradial algorithms areno longer applicable(cf. the discussion
of §10, especially, (SSIdFs)).
Here, it is perhaps helpful to recall that thelabels used in IUTch to denotedistinct
hol. strs./ring theories may be thought of, from the point of view of takinglog-
volumes of regions in tensor packets of log-shells (i.e., the situation that occurs,
for instance, in the ﬁnal portion of [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12), as
(LbLV) markers that denote whether (a certain suitable “generator” called the
“pilot object”of) the value group portionof the gluing data in the Θ-
link is identiﬁed with thelog-volume of “q” (i.e., which corresponds to
t h ec a s eo ft h eq-hol. str.) or with thelog-volume of “{qj2
}” (i.e., which
corresponds to the case of the Θ-hol. str.).

24 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(For more details, we refer to, for instance, the discussion of “toy models”in
[IUTchIII], Remark 3.12.2, (ii).) The multiradial algorithms of [IUTchIII], The-
orem 3.11, then provide analternative way to compute the log-volume of the
Θ-pilot object in terms of theq-hol. str., up to certain indeterminacies.I n t h i s
context, it is important to remember that
(MlLV) unlike thelinear correspondence induced by the Θ-link — i.e., in eﬀect,
a linear relationshipbetween copies of the topological group of real num-
bers “R” — between thelog-volume of the Θ-pilot object relative to the
Θ-hol. str. and thelog-volume of theq-pilot objectrelative to theq-hol.
str., this computation, via themultiradial algorithmsof IUTch, of the
log-volume of the Θ-pilot object in terms of theq-hol. str. involves cer-
tain indeterminacies, which give rise to ahighly non-linearrelationship
between the log-volume of the Θ-pilot object in theΘ-hol. str. and the
log-volume of themultiradial representation of theΘ-pilot object.
This general qualitative phenomenon ofindeterminacies giving rise to a highly
non-linear relationship between the log-volume of a (“rigid”)r e g i o nnot subjectto
indeterminacies and the log-volume of anapproximation (say, from above) of the
(“rigid”) region thatis subjectto indeterminacies may be understood by considering
the following elementary example:
(LVEx) Write V = R2 (i.e., a copy of two-dimensional Euclidean space),σ:
V
∼
→V fortheautomorphismof V givenby V ∋ (x,y) ↦→ (−x,y). Denote
byW the“stack-theoretic quotient”ofV by the groupGofautomorphisms
of V of order 2 generated by σ. Thus, we have a natural ﬁnite ´etale
morphism of degree2
φ: V → W
of “orbispaces”. Next, let us consider the followingregion of V and its
“symmetrization”with respect to the action ofG:
Ra,b
def
= {(x,y) ∈V || x|≤ 1, 0 ≤|y|≤ a}
∪{(x,y) ∈V | 0 ≤x ≤1,a ≤|y|≤ a+b};
Sa,b
def
= Ra,b ∪σ(Ra,b)
—w h e r ea,b >0 are positive real numbers. Then one computes easily the
log-volume “μlog(−)” (i.e., the natural logarithm of the volume relative to
the usual Euclidean measure) of these regions as follows:
μlog(Sa,b) = log(4a+4b) >μ log(Ra,b) = log(4a+2b).
In particular, we observe that
the ratio [μlog(Sa,b): μlog(Ra,b)] (which may be thought of as
a point of the projective line overR) varies continuously—
i.e., is far from being constant, as would be the case if the
relationship between the two log-volumes werelinear —a sa, b
vary.
Here, sinceσ(Sa,b)= Sa,b, onemaythinkof Sa,b asbeing “deﬁned overW”
and hence, at a purely formal level, equipped with a“label”W (which we

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 25
shalldenotebya subscript “W”). Ontheotherhand, since σ(Ra,b) ̸= Ra,b,
Ra,b is only “deﬁned over V”, hence, at a purely formal level, may be
thought of as being equipped with a“label”V (which we shall denote by
a subscript “V”). Here, as the inclusionRa,b ⊆Sa,b suggests,
onemaythinkofthe label “V”asdenotingasortof “incomplete
portion”of thelabel “W”.
Next, let us consider a real numberλ∈R such that a, b, λsatisfy the
inequalities
μlog(Sa,b) > 0 >λ>μ log(Ra,b)
— which imply, in particular, thatμlog(Sa,b) ̸= λ, and that the positive
real number 1<ρ
def
= μlog(Ra,b)·λ−1 ∈R is well-deﬁned. We shall think
of λas the log-volume of some region “Rλ”t h a ti s“deﬁned overW”, i.e.,
at a more concrete level, a region ofV stable under the action ofG. Then,
relative to the analogy with IUTch — i.e., especially thekey argumentin
Step (xi) of the proof of [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12 — we have the following
correspondences:
· Ra,b corresponds to the Θ-pilot relative to the Θ-hol. str.;
· Sa,b corresponds to theholomorphic hull,r e l a t i v et ot h eq-
hol. str.,o ft h emultiradial representation of the Θ-pilot,
with “indeterminacies”given by the action of the groupG;
· Rλcorresponds to theq-pilot;
· the assignmentμlog(Ra,b)V ↦→ λW = μlog(Rλ)W determines an
R-linear“gluing isomorphism”RV
∼
→RW, i.e., givenby“dividing
by the factorρ”; this gluing isomorphism corresponds to the Θ-
link;
· the chain of relationships of log-volumes
μlog(Sa,b)W >μlog(Ra,b)V ↦→ λW
—w h e r et h e“↦→”i st h egluing determined by the assignment
μlog(Ra,b)V ↦→ λW = μlog(Rλ)W just discussed — corresponds
tothechainofrelationshipsbetweenlog-volumesintheargument
of Step (xi) of the proof of [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12.
This lastchain of relationships of log-volumesis remarkablein that it may
be interpreted in the following way:
the inequality μ
log(Sa,b)W >μlog(Ra,b)V arises (not from the
gluing given by dividing/multiplying, i.e., depending on the di-
rection in which one is going, by a factor ofρ, but rather) from
the geometry of the regionsRa,b ⊆Sa,b and the deﬁnition of
W as a “stack-theoretic quotient” ofV by G, but is, neverthe-
less, entirelylogically consistent— i.e., in the sense that the
composite inequalityμlog(Sa,b)W >λW does indeed hold in the
copy “RW”o fR labeled byW —w i t ht h egluing given by di-
viding/multiplying by a factor ofρ.

26 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Here, we observe that thislogical consistencyof the gluing (given by di-
viding/multiplying by a factor of ρ)w i t ht h einequality μlog(Sa,b)W >
μlog(Ra,b)V depends, in an essential way, on thegeometry of the regions
Ra,b and Sa,b,a sw e l la st h einequalities satisﬁed by a, b,a n dλ. In par-
ticular, it is
no means the case that a similar consistency property
is satisﬁed by arbitrary regionsof W, V and an arbitrary real
number λ.
Finally, we observe that thelabels “V”a n d“W”i nt h echain of relation-
ships of log-volumesμlog(Sa,b)W >μlog(Ra,b)V ↦→ λW may be interpreted
in the following way:
· the V-labeled real numberμlog(Ra,b)V is the log-volume of an
“incomplete portion” of some “complete object” whose
log-volume is theW-labeledreal numberμlog(Rλ)W = λW;
· on the other hand, therelationship of “completion”between
the V-labeled “incomplete portion”and theW-labeled “complete
object”may also beestimated from aboveby considering the
inclusion within the symmetrization(Sa,b)W ⊇(Ra,b)V ,w h i c h ,
upon passing to log-volumes, yields an inequalityμlog(Sa,b)W >
μlog(Ra,b)V .
The situation just described in detail in the present (LVEx) is precisely
the sort of situation that arises in the argument of Step (xi) of the proof
of [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12.
Another interesting and relatively elementary example of the phenomenon of com-
puting the“size”of aregionsubject toindeterminacies (cf. the multiradial repre-
sentation of the Θ-pilot object in IUTch) thatapproximates(say, from above) some
region of interestthat is“rigid”and not subject to indeterminacies(cf. the Θ-pilot
relative to the Θ-hol. str. in IUTch) may be seen in thedisplacement estimates
that appear inBogomolov’s proofof the geometric version of the Szpiro Con-
jecture (cf. the discussion of (DsInd) below). Finally, in this context, we remark
that the importance of working withdistinct hol. strs./ring theoriesis discussed in
detail — and in a fashion directed toward an audience of non-mathematicians —
in, roughly, the ﬁnal 30 minutes of the video [FKvid].
§13. One topic to which a substantial amount of time and energy was devoted,
especially during the ﬁrst few days of the March discussions, was the topic ofpoly-
morphisms in IUTch (cf. (T4)), i.e., sets (that are not necessarily of cardinality
1!) of morphisms between two objects. SS (especially, Scholze) weresubstantially
opposed to the use of poly-morphisms in IUTch. This opposition appeared to be
based, to a substantial extent, on“taste/aesthetics”(cf. (T4-1)). In this context,
however, it should be remembered that, although the term “poly-morphism”is
apparently new, in fact poly-morphisms — i.e., in eﬀect,
(PMInd) situations in which one wishes to regard morphisms/objects of interest
up to/modulo some sort ofindeterminacy, the elimination of which is
not a matter of interest

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 27
— appear quite frequently in mathematics. Well-known examples include
(PMEx1) homotopy, or stable homotopy, classes of continuous maps between
topological spaces;
(PMEx2) morphisms in derived categories between complexes, i.e., morphisms that
may be related to morphisms between complexes in the naive sense only
by considering theclasses of such naive morphisms obtained byinverting
the quasi-isomorphisms.
Here, before proceeding, it is perhaps of interest to observe the existence of“trivial
examples”of poly-morphisms:
(PMTrv) For i =1 ,2, suppose thatG
i is a group, and thatHi ⊆Gi is a normal
subgroup. Then a group homomorphism φ: G1/H1 → G2/H2 between
the quotient groupsG1/H1, G2/H2 may be regarded as atrivial exam-
ple of a poly-morphism, i.e., by thinking ofφas the collection of group
homomorphisms G1 → G2 that liftφ.
A poly-morphism of the sort discussed in (PMTrv) is“trivial”in the sense that it
may be expressed as a (single!)morphism (i.e., map!) between quotient sets (i.e.,
the sets “Gi/Hi”f o ri =1 ,2). By contrast:
(PMQut) The examples of poly-morphisms that occur in IUTch — such as those
that arise from the indeterminacies (Ind1,2) — make use of the notion of
a poly-morphism in a nontrivial way precisely because theycannot be ex-
pressed assingle mapsbetween quotient sets. (Here, we note that the
examples (PMEx1) and (PMEx2) are also nontrivial in this sense. For in-
stance, there is no meaningful sense in which one can deﬁne the“quotient
set”of a topological space by its group of homotopy self-equivalences.)
It is precisely this sort of situation that requires the use offormal tech-
niques — such as in the case ofalgebraic stacks(as opposed to schemes or
algebraic spaces) ororbifolds (as opposed to topological manifolds) — in
order to work withquotients in some sort ofabstract or formal sense.
This is precisely what is obtained in IUTch by the introduction of the
“formal technique” constituted by the notion of apoly-morphism.
SS at times justiﬁed their opposition to the“apparently substantively mean-
ingless”(cf. (T4-2)) use of poly-morphisms by invoking the issue ofsimplicity (cf.
(T7)), but, as one may see in the well-known examples (PMEx1), (PMEx2), work-
ing with speciﬁc morphisms in situations where it is much more natural to work
with classes of morphisms, tends to have the eﬀect of rendering arguments much
more complicated,o rless tractable(cf. the discussion of§8). Put another way, as
was discussed in§5, §6, §7, §8, §9, §10 (cf., especially, the discussion of (SSInd),
(SW), (Sym), (SWE1), (SWE2), (VUC), (SSId), (SSIdFs)):
(PMEss) The use of poly-morphisms in IUTch — e.g., the introduction of in-
determinacies such as (Ind1,2) — plays the quitesubstantive role of
yielding structures that admit certainsymmetries (cf. the discussion of
§8), which form the basis ofmultiradiality, in a fashion that iscom-
patible with suitable portions of thering structuresin the domain and
codomain of the Θ-link (cf. the discussion of§9, §10).
Further remarks concerning the use of poly-morphisms in IUTch may be found in
[Alien], §4.1, (iv).

28 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
§14. Another topic to which a substantial amount of time and energy was devoted,
especially during the ﬁrst few days of the March discussions, was the topic oflabels
in IUTch (cf. (T5)) to distinguishdistinct copiesof various familiar objects that
play substantively diﬀerent rolesin the various apparatuses treated in IUTch.
SS (especially, Scholze) weresubstantially opposed to the use of labels in IUTch.
This opposition appeared to be based, to a substantial extent, on“taste/aesthetics”
(cf. (T5-1)). In this context, however, it should be remembered that in fact “labels”
— i.e., in eﬀect,
(LbRl) situations in which one wishes to distinguish distinct copies of var-
ious familiar objects that playsubstantively diﬀerent roleswithin a
complicated apparatus
— appear quite frequently in mathematics. Well-known examples include the fol-
lowing:
(LbEx1) The substantive signiﬁcance of the use of labels may be seen in the
following fundamental example: One considers the(“line segment”) graph
Γseg
•— •
given bytwo verticesjoined via asingle edge.W r i t eΓloop for the(“loop”)
graphobtained from Γseg by identifying thetwo distinct verticesof Γseg —
i.e., which may be thought of asdistinct labels—t oa single vertex.T h u s ,
Γseg is structurally diﬀerentfrom Γloop in the sense that Γseg is simply
connected, while Γloop is not. This diﬀerence gives rise tovery substan-
tive consequencesin many situations, e.g., situations where some sort of
“parallel transport”or “analytic continuation”along the loop of
Γloop gives rise to some sort ofnontrivial monodromy operator.T h i s
sort of nontrivial monodromy may beresolvedprecisely bydistinguish-
ing the situations that ariseprior toand subsequent tothe application of
the monodromy operator, i.e.,by working overΓseg as opposed toΓloop.
When, moreover, one wishes to distinguish situations that ariseprior to
and subsequent tomultiple applications of the monodromy operator, it is
natural to consider theuniversal coveringΓuni
... •— •— •— •...
of Γloop, which may be thought of as the result ofconcatenating distinct
copies ofΓseg labeled by elements∈Z.O n efundamental example of this
sort of situation, i.e., ofnontrivial monodromy around a loop, is the (angu-
lar portion of the)logarithm functionin one-variable complex analysis.
This example is, moreover, reminiscent of the situation surrounding the
vertical columns oflog-links that appear in thelog-theta-lattice of IUTch
(cf. (LbLp) below). Alternatively, one may understand
the incompatibility of the Θ-link (i.e., a horizontal arrow in
the log-theta-lattice)w i t harithmetic degrees (cf. (AD)) as a
sort ofnontrivial monodromyaround theloop (i.e., a special
case of “Γloop”!) that arises as soon as oneidentiﬁes the domain
and codomain of the Θ-link — an incompatibility, i.e.,“con-
tradiction”, that is in fact avoided in IUTch (cf. (IUAD))

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 29
precisely bydistinguishing the (ring structures in the) domain
and codomain of theΘ-link, i.e., by working with “Γseg”, and
then applying themultiradial algorithmsof IUTch to obtain
an alternative way tocompute this nontrivial monodromy
(cf. (GIUT)).
(LbEx2) Suppose that A is acommutative domain with unity, f ∈A a nonzero,
non-unit. Then the localization Af of A with respect to f may be
constructed as theinductive limitof theinductive system
...
f·
−→ An−1
f·
−→ An
f·
−→ An+1
f·
−→ ...
given bycopies “An”o fA labeled by elementsn ∈Z and transition mor-
phisms given by multiplicationf. Here, we observe thatforgetting the
choice of a“speciﬁc basepoint label0 ∈Z”does not have any substantive
eﬀect on the construction if one is only interested in theA-module struc-
ture of Af. If, on the other hand, one is interested in constructing the
ring structureon Af,t h e ni ti so fcrucial importanceto specify a“spe-
ciﬁc basepoint label 0 ∈Z”, i.e., a speciﬁc copy for which the unity
element 1∈A of A serves as theunity element for the newly constructed
Af. Thus, in summary:
Omitting the labelsleads toconfusion concerning which copy
of the unity element 1∈A is to be regarded as theunity element
for “Af”. Such confusion may, of course, bemisinterpreted as
an “internal contradiction”in the theory of localizations of
commutative rings with unity. In fact, however, there isno “in-
ternal contradiction”in the theory of such localizations; the
apparent “internal contradiction” is nothing more than a super-
ﬁcial consequence of theerroneous operation of omitting the
labels.
(LbEx3) Consider the polynomial ring A
def
= Fp[t] in one variable over the ﬁeld
of cardinality p, for some prime number p.W r i t eφ: A → A for the
Frobenius endomorphism, i.e., the ring endomorphism given by sending
t ↦→ tp. Then theperfection A∞ of A — i.e.,Fp[{t1/pn
}n≥1]—m a yb e
constructed as theinductive limitof theinductive system
...
φ
−→ An−1
φ
−→ An
φ
−→ An+1
φ
−→ ...
given by copies “An”o fA labeled by elements n ∈Z and transition
morphisms given by (copies of)φ. Here, we observe that, if oneforgets
the labels n ∈Z, i.e., and just considers the inductive system given by
a single copy of A and the transition morphism φ: A → A, then one
computes easily that the resultinginductive limitis isomorphic to adirect
sum ⊕Fp of p copies ofFp (i.e., and hencenot isomorphicto A∞!). Thus,
in summary:
Omitting the labels leads to confusion between mutually
non-isomorphic inductive limits (i.e., A∞, ⊕Fp). Such confu-

30 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
sion may, of course, bemisinterpreted as an“internal contra-
diction”in the theory of perfections in positive characteristic.
In fact, however, there isno “internal contradiction”in the
theory of perfections in positive characteristic; the apparent “in-
ternal contradiction” is nothing more than a superﬁcial conse-
quence of theerroneous operation of omitting the labels.
For more detailed discussions of phenomena arising from theFrobenius
morphism in positive characteristicthataremoredirectlyrelatedtoIUTch,
we refer to (EtFrEx) below, as well as [Alien], Example 2.6.1; the discus-
sion of [Alien],§2.7.
(LbEx4) Write λ∈C for theunique positive real root∈C of the equationX3 −
2=0 , ω
def
=e x p (2
3πi) ∈C, Q ⊆ C for the ﬁeld of rational numbers,
F1
def
= Q(λ) ⊆C, F2
def
= Q(ω·λ) ⊆C, K
def
= Q(ω,λ) ⊆C.T h u s ,w e
have a diagram ofﬁeld extensions
K
⧸⧹
F1 F2
⧹⧸
Q
such thatQ = F1 ∩F2, K = F1 ·F2. In particular, one may interpret the
portion of the above diagram involvingF1, F2, Q as a situation in which
one hastwo distinct abstract ﬁeldsF1, F2 that areglued together
(in the category of sets) along the subﬁelds Q ⊆ F1, Q ⊆ F2 (via
the unique isomorphism between these subﬁelds) — cf. the description
of the Θ-link at the beginning of§9; (ΘNR). Observe that there exists a
unique isomorphism of ﬁelds ψ: F1
∼
→ F2,w h i c h ,o fc o u r s e ,i snot
compatible with the respective embeddingsF1 ↪→ K, F2 ↪→ K. Then:
If one identiﬁes F1 and F2 by means ofψa n dt h e nu s e st h i s
identiﬁcationto omit the labels“1”, “2”thatareusedtodistin-
guish the ﬁeldsF1, F2, then it is easy to obtain a“contradiction”
concerning the structure of the ﬁeldK. Such a “contradiction”
may, of course, bemisinterpreted as an “internal contradic-
tion”in the elementary theory of ﬁeld extensions. In fact, how-
ever, there isno “internal contradiction”in the elementary
theory of ﬁeld extensions; the apparent “internal contradiction”
is nothing more than a superﬁcial consequence of theerroneous
operation of omitting the labels used to distinguish the ﬁelds
F1, F2.
(LbEx5) (This example may, roughly speaking, be thought of as a sort of gen-
eralization of the example discussed in (LbEx1).) Consider the theory of

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 31
(topological or diﬀerential)manifolds of dimensionn,f o rn a positive in-
teger. Manifolds (of dimensionn) are, by deﬁnition, collections ofdistinct
copies— i.e., copies equipped withdistinct labels—o f(n-dimensional)
Euclidean spaceglued together by means of variousgluing isomorphisms.
In particular, it is quite possible that the use of numerous distinct
copies of Euclidean spacein this theory might impress a newcomer to
this theory (such as a student) as being entirelysuperﬂuous. Such a
newcomer might feel motivated to attempt to achieve a“dramatic sim-
pliﬁcation”of this theory byidentifyingthese copies of Euclidean space
with one another and hence to assert that the geometry ofarbitrary(topo-
logical or diﬀerential)manifolds (of dimensionn)m a yb e“reduced”to
the geometry of (n-dimensional) Euclidean space.M o r e o v e r :
If one identiﬁes these distinct copies of Euclidean space
that appear in the theory of (topological or diﬀerential) mani-
folds with one another, then it is easy to obtain a“contradic-
tion”. Such a “contradiction” may, of course, bemisinterpreted
as an “internal contradiction”in the theory of (topological
or diﬀerential) manifolds. In fact, however, there isno “inter-
nal contradiction”in the theory of (topological or diﬀerential)
manifolds; the apparent “internal contradiction” is nothing more
than a superﬁcial consequence of theerroneous operation of
omitting the labelsused to distinguish the distinct copies of Eu-
clidean space.
(LbEx6) In the context of the mathematics discussed in the present report, one
fundamental example of the use of labelsmay be seen in thevery def-
inition of the “id-version”of (SSId). Indeed, the “−−” that appears
in (SSId) is a notational device that documents the understanding that
the ring structureson opposite sides of the “−−”are to be regarded as
unrelated, i.e., in eﬀect, equipped withdistinct labels, as in the dis-
cussion of (VUC2). Here, we recall that this understanding that thering
structures on opposite sides of the “−−” with distinct labels — say, “⋏”
and “⋎” — are to be regarded asunrelatedis thecrucial ingredientin the
approach discussed in (VUC2) to avoiding theincompatibilityproperty —
i.e., in eﬀect,internal contradiction— inherent in themodiﬁed version
of theΘ-link discussed in (VUC1). On the other hand,
in order to apply themultiradial algorithms of IUTch, it is nec-
essary to identify/confuse these distinct labels “⋏”a n d“⋎”
[cf. the discussion of (ΘCR), (†ΘCR), (SSIdFs)].
From apurely “label-theoretic”point of view, in order to obtainconsistent
deﬁnitions of well-deﬁned mathematical objects that are immune, i.e.,
remain unaﬀected, by application of these two operations
• ↦→
⋏
−−−
⋎
;
⋏
−−−
⋎
↦→•

32 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
[i.e., of introducing distinct labels for distinct copies “⋏”a n d“⋎”o fa
single copy “•”a n didentifying/confusing distinct copies “⋏”a n d“⋎”t o
a single copy “•”], is to
identify the distinct labels once and for all and work only with
mathematical objects that areindependent of distinct labels.
On the other hand, as discussed above, this leads to aninternal contra-
diction [cf. the discussion of (VUC1)] in the deﬁnition of the id-version
of (SSId), unless, of course, one regards
all exponents of “q”as being subject to the indeterminacy
given by possible multiplication by factors “j2”— an indeter-
minacy which, as discussed in (AD), then renders all arithmetic
degree computationsmeaningless.
SS at times justiﬁed their opposition to the“apparently substantively mean-
ingless”(cf. (T5-2)) use of “labels” by invoking the issue ofsimplicity (cf. (T7)).
At other times, SS asserted that the omission of labels could be justiﬁed simply
by “remembering”the fact that some arrow (corresponding to the“monodromy
operator”in (LbEx1), “f·” in (LbEx2), “φ” in (LbEx3), “ψ” in (LbEx4), the “glu-
ing isomorphisms” in (LbEx5), or the “modiﬁed version of the Θ-link” of (VUC1)
in the case of (LbEx6)) is not compatible with certain structures in its domain
and codomain. On the other hand, as one may see in the above examples (LbEx1),
(LbEx2), (LbEx3), (LbEx4), (LbEx5), (LbEx6),omitting the labelsmay, depending
on thespeciﬁcs of the situation, easily give rise to a“contradiction”(which is in
fact meaningless!) that doesnot occur if onerespects the labels, i.e., if onerespects
the distinct roles played by distinct copies.I np a r t i c u l a r ,no matter “how good” a
particular mathematician’s memory may be,
(DfLb) relying, in mathematical discussions, on declarations of “remembering”
that are not accompanied by precise, explicit documentation of the label-
ing apparatuses that are employedincurs the risk thatdiﬀerent people
will “remember”diﬀerent labeling apparatuses, which result instruc-
turally non-equivalent mathematical structures.
That is to say, as one may see in the above examples (LbEx1), (LbEx2), (LbEx3),
(LbEx4), (LbEx5), (LbEx6), thesubstantive mathematical contentof a math-
ematical construction is only completely determined once onemakes completely
explicit the labeling apparatusthat is adopted in the construction.
§15. In light of the general considerations concerning the use oflabels discussed
in §14, it is of interest to review the way in which labels for distinct copies of
various familiar objects are employed in IUTch in order to construct apparatuses
that play varioussubstantive rolesin IUTch thatcannot be achieved if the labels
are deleted.O n efundamental exampleof this phenomenon is
(LbHT) the bookkeeping apparatus forlabels for evaluation pointswithin a
single Hodge theater— an apparatus which plays the very substantive

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 33
role of allowing one tosimulate global multiplicative subspacesand
canonical generators.
This phenomenon is discussed in detail in [IUTchI],§I1 (and indeed throughout
[IUTchI]!). On the other hand, such labels within a single Hodge theater were only
mentioned very brieﬂy during the March discussions. The “label issues” that were
discussed in substantial detail during the March discussions concern thelabels
∈Z×Z that correspond to the “•’s” in thelog-theta-lattice. Here, we begin our
discussion of these labels by recalling the(highly noncommutative!) diagramthat is
used to denote theentire log-theta-lattice(i.e., the LHS of the “⊇”), together with
the portion of the log-theta-lattice (i.e., the RHS of the “⊇”, which consists of the
vertical arrowsin the 0-a n d1-columns, together with thesingle horizontal arrow
between the•’s labeled (0,0) and (1,0 ) )t h a ti sactually usedin the main results of
IUTch:
... ...
↑⏐⏐log
↑⏐⏐log
...
Θ
−→ •
Θ
−→ •
Θ
−→ ...
↑⏐⏐log
↑⏐⏐log
...
Θ
−→ •
Θ
−→ •
Θ
−→ ...
↑⏐⏐log
↑⏐⏐log
...
Θ
−→ •
Θ
−→ •
Θ
−→ ...
↑⏐⏐log
↑⏐⏐log
...
...
⊇
... ...
↑⏐⏐log
↑⏐⏐log
••
↑⏐⏐log
↑⏐⏐log
•
Θ
−→ •
↑⏐⏐log
↑⏐⏐log
••
↑⏐⏐log
↑⏐⏐log
...
...
We recall brieﬂy that each•denotes asingle Hodge theater(labeled by an element
∈Z × Z), which one thinks of as asingle model of the conventional ring/scheme
theory surrounding the elliptic curve over a number ﬁeld under consideration. One
then considerstwo types of gluing(denoted by theverticaland horizontal arrowsin
the diagrams) between certain portions of the Hodge theaters in the domain and
codomain of each arrow. Thevertical arrowsdenote log-links, while thehorizontal
arrows denote Θ-links. The following example of the signiﬁcance of the labels
∈Z × Z for distinct •’s is already immediate from the structure of the above
diagrams:
(LbLp) Write
⃗ΓZ
for the oriented graph given by the portion of the log-theta-lattice con-
sisting of thevertical arrowsin the 0-column and the horizontal arrows
originating from the 0-column.W r i t e
⃗Γ0
for the oriented subgraph of⃗ΓZ consisting of thevertical arrowsin the 0-
column and thesingle horizontal arrowbetween the•’s labeled (0,0) and

34 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(1,0). Then the operation offorgetting the vertical labelsamounts to
replacing ⃗Γ0 by the oriented graph
⃗Γloop
given by thesingle horizontal arrowof ⃗Γ0, together with anoriented loop
originating from and terminating at the domain of thissingle horizontal
arrow. Alternatively, one may think of⃗Γloop as the quotient “⃗ΓZ/Z”o f
⃗ΓZ by the action ofZ on ⃗ΓZ via vertical translations. On the other hand,
purely at the level of oriented graphs, itisimmediatethat ⃗ΓZ,⃗Γloop = ⃗ΓZ/Z
are structurally non-equivalent to ⃗Γ0. For instance, (unlike⃗ΓZ!) ⃗Γ0
fails to admitvertical symmetries; (unlike⃗Γloop!) ⃗Γ0 (as well as⃗ΓZ)i s
simply connected (cf. the discussion of (LbEx1)). Thesefundamental
structural diﬀerencesbetween ⃗Γ0, on the one hand, and ⃗ΓZ, ⃗Γloop,o n
the other, have verysubstantive consequences in the context of the
deﬁnition of the Θ-link (i.e., the horizontal arrow of⃗Γ0), which depends,
in an essential way, onﬁxing the multiplicative structures of the rings
involved, i.e., isnot invariantwith respect to the“rotations/juggling”
of the additive and multiplicative structuresthat occur as one executes
various iterates of thelog-link (cf. the discussion, in the latter portion of
[Alien], §3.3, (ii), of the importance, in the context of thedeﬁnition of the
Θ-link,o fdistinguishing the ring structuresin thedomain and codomain
of the log-link).
In order to discuss furthersymmetry properties (cf. (SWE1), (SWE2)) of the log-
theta-lattice, it is useful to apply the notation “Π”, “G”, “O×μ”, “k”, and “k
×
”o f
(SWE1), (SWE2), (ΘNR), (ΘCR). Here, we recall thatk is an algebraically closed
ﬁeld equipped with a p-adic valuation and a natural action by the topological
group G, which, in turn, may be regarded as a quotient of the topological group
Π, and thatk
×
⊆k is the multiplicative monoid of nonzero elements ofk.W r i t e
O× ⊆k for the multiplicative group of units (with respect to the valuation) of
k.( T h u s ,k, k
×
,a n dO× are equipped with natural G-actions, and the object
“O×μ” may be regarded as the quotient ofO× by its torsion subgroup.) Then
we observe the following non-symmetry properties of the log-theta-lattice (cf.
(SWE1), (SWE2)):
(LbΘ) No horizontal arrow (i.e., Θ-link) of the log-theta-lattice admits a
symmetry that permutes its domain and codomain.Indeed, this may be
seen by considering the portion of a•(i.e., a Hodge theater) consisting
of a single copy ofk. That is to say, such a symmetry would imply the
existence of a symmetry thatpermutes the domain and codomain of the
diagram
k
×
∋ qj2
↦→ q ∈k
×
(where j =1 ,...,l ⋇; q and the qj2
’s are regarded up to multiplication
by possibly distinct roots of unity), i.e., the existence of a pair of isomor-
phisms of topological ﬁeldsα: k
∼
→ k, β: k
∼
→ k such that α(qj2
)= q,
β(q)= qj2
(up to multiplication by possibly distinct roots of unity). One
veriﬁes immediately thatsuch a pair of isomorphisms does not exist.

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 35
(Lblog) No vertical arrow(i.e., log-link) of the log-theta-lattice admits asym-
metry that permutes its domain and codomain.Indeed, this may be seen
by considering the portion of a•(i.e., a Hodge theater) consisting of a sin-
gle copy ofk. That is to say, such a symmetry would imply the existence
of a symmetry thatpermutes the domain and codomain of the diagram
k ⊇O× log
−→k
(where log denotes thep-adic logarithmdeﬁned onO×), i.e., the existence
of a pair of isomorphisms of topological ﬁeldsα: k
∼
→ k, β: k
∼
→ k such
that, if we writeM
def
=l o g−1(O×) ⊆O×,t h e nα|M =l o g◦(β|O×)◦(log|M).
One veriﬁes immediately thatsuch a pair of isomorphisms does not exist.
(LbMn) Write
⃗Γmain
for the oriented graph given by the portion of the log-theta-lattice that is
actually usedin the main results of IUTch, i.e., the portion consisting of
the vertical arrowsin the 0-a n d1-columnsand thesingle horizontal arrow
between the•’s labeled (0,0) and (1,0). Then one veriﬁes immediately (cf.
(LbΘ), (Lblog)!) that the portion determined by⃗Γmain of the log-theta-
lattice doesnot admit asymmetry that permutes the0-a n d1-columns.
It is precisely because of thesenon-symmetry properties (LbΘ), (Lblog), (LbMn)
that (at least from ana prioripoint of view!)
it is ofcrucial importanceto specify the labels∈Z×Z when discussing
variousportions(suchas“ k”, “k
×
”, “O×”)ofthe•’s(i.e., Hodgetheaters)
in the log-theta-lattice.
The portions of the•’s (i.e., Hodge theaters) that (at least from ana prioripoint
of view!)depend on the labels∈Z×Z are referred to, in IUTch, asFrobenius-
like. On the other hand, objects arising from certain Galois groups (such asG)
or arithmetic fundamental groups (such as Π) are referred to as´etale-like.I fo n e
restricts oneself to considering isomorphisms between objects, for instance, in
situations that often arise inanabelian geometry, then there is not so much of a
diﬀerence betweenFrobenius-likeand ´etale-like versions of various objects. On the
other hand, when one considers the relationship between objects onopposite sidesof
the Θ- and log-links,t h e r ei sav e r yfundamental diﬀerencebetween Frobenius-like
and ´etale-like versions of various objects, namely:
(EtFr) Whereas Frobenius-like objects on opposite sides of the Θ- and
log-links are (typically) related to one another by means of some sort of
relationship that isfar from being anisomorphism (e.g., far from being
compatible with the respectivering structures!), ´etale-likeobjects on
opposite sidesof the Θ- and log-links are (typically) related to one another
by means of anisomorphism.
Perhaps the most fundamental classical example of this sort of situation is the
situation that arises in the case of theanabelian geometryof one-dimensional
function ﬁelds over ﬁnite ﬁelds, in the context of theFrobenius morphism

36 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
in positive characteristic [cf. the discussion of [Alien], §2.6, §2.7, §2.8, for more
details]:
(EtFrEx) Consider the ﬁeldF
def
= Fp(t) (i.e., a purely transcendental extension of
t h eﬁ e l do fc a r d i n a l i t yp), for some prime numberp. Then theFrobenius
morphism φ: F → F, i.e., the ﬁeld homomorphism that mapst ↦→ tp,
induces anisomorphism
Aut(F)
∼
→ Aut(F)
between the respectivegroups of ﬁeld automorphisms, despite the fact that
φis far from being anisomorphism.
(Indeed, it is precisely this fundamental classical example that gave rise to the
terminology “Frobenius-like”and “´etale-like”.) Unlike the various Frobenius-like
objects discussed in (LbΘ), (Lblog), (LbMn), ´etale-like objects admit important
symmetry properties as follows (cf. (SWE1), (SWE2)):
(EtΘ) It is atautological consequence of the deﬁnitionsthat the “G’s” in the
domainandcodomainoftheΘ-link—i.e., whichactonthecopiesof O× ⊆
k
×
⊆k in the domain and codomain of the Θ-link — map isomorphically
to one another via the Θ-link and, moreover, when regarded asabstract
topological groups (i.e., which arenot equippedwith any data arising
from the usual actions ofG on some copy ofO× ⊆k
×
⊆k!), may be
permuted with one another.
(Etlog)I t i s atautological consequence of the deﬁnitionsthat the “Π’s” in the
domain and codomain of thelog-link — i.e., which act on the copies of
O× ⊆k
×
⊆k in the domain and codomain of thelog-link — map iso-
morphically to one another via thelog-link and, moreover, when regarded
as abstract topological groups (i.e., which arenot equippedwith any
data arising from the usual actions of Π on some copy ofO× ⊆k
×
⊆k!),
may bepermuted with one another.
(EtMn) It is atautological consequence of the deﬁnitionsthat the diagram
Π ↠ G ↞ Π
— where the Π’s andG are regarded asabstract topological groups
(which are only known up to isomorphisms of topological groups); the↠,
↞arethe poly-morphisms(i.e., setsofmorphisms)givenbythecomposites
of the natural surjection Π↠ G with arbitrary automorphisms of the
domain and codomain; the Π on the LHS (respectively, RHS) arises from
the 0- (respectively, 1-)column of⃗Γmain (cf. (LbMn), (Etlog)); theG arises
from the unique horizontal arrow of⃗Γmain (cf. (LbMn), (EtΘ)) — admits
a symmetry that permutes the Π’s on the LHS and RHS and ﬁxes the
unique G of the diagram.
As discussed in §8, these symmetry properties (EtΘ), (Etlog), (EtMn) are the
fundamental propertiesthat underlie themultiradial algorithmsof IUTch (i.e.,
[IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11) and, in particular, play acentral rolein IUTch.

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 37
§16. One sort ofundercurrent themethat underlies the variousmisunderstandings
(cf. §2) discussed so far in the present report is
(DsGl) the deep sense of discomfort that some mathematicians feel with
regard to thegluing/identiﬁcation given by the value group portion of
the Θ-link (cf.§9)
{qj2
}N ∼
→ qN
— a sense of discomfort that is perhaps partially related to the discussion
surrounding (HstMod).
One possible approach to overcoming this sense of discomfort is to recall various
classical examplesof closely related phenomena.
Perhaps themost fundamentalsuch “classical example” is
(GlMt) the special case of the property ofinvariance of heights with respect to
isogeny (established by Faltings) in the case ofglobal multiplicative
subspaces of modules of torsion points of elliptic curves over number
ﬁelds, i.e., subspaces thatcoincide, at all nonarchimedean primes of bad
multiplicative reduction, with the subspace arising from the copy of the
multiplicative group scheme“Gm” that occurs in theTate uniformization
(cf. [Alien], §2.3, for more details).
That is to say, such isogenies arising from global multiplicative subspaces corre-
spond (say, in the case ofl-torsion points, forl a prime number) locally at nonar-
chimedean primes of bad reduction to the operation ofraising q-parameters to the
l-th power
q ↦→ ql
(cf. (DsGl)). In this context, it is useful to recall that:
(DFL) As discussed in [Alien], §2.3, §2.4, §2.5, this example (GlMt) is closely
related to the technique of takingderivatives of Frobenius liftings,
which, as discussed in [Alien],§2.6, §2.7, motivated the development of
t h et e c h n i q u eo fmono-anabelian transport, which plays acentral role
in IUTch.
One way to summarize theessential mechanisminvolved here is as follows:
(DiIsm) On the one hand, theassignment
q ↦→ ql
(cf. (DsGl))is, inessence, a“dilation”, i.e., multipliesheights/degrees/log-
volumes by afactor ofl. On the other hand, this assignmentinduces
dlog(q) ↦→ l·dlog(q)
(essentially, since thefactor ofl preceding the “dlog(q)” can typically, for
various technical reasons, beignored!) an “isometry”. Moreover, since
the arithmetic line bundle “ω” of invariant diﬀerentials on each of the
elliptic curves under consideration arises from anample line bundle on
the moduli stack of elliptic curves, its arithmetic degree (i.e., the height of

38 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
the elliptic curve) issuﬃcient to control the moduli of the elliptic curve(up
to ﬁnitely many possibilities). It is precisely this“tension”between the
“dilation”and“isometry”aspectsoftheassignment q ↦→ ql, togetherwith
the ampleness just mentioned, that gives rise tonontrivial consequences
concerning the elliptic curves involved.
Relative to the analogy with the technique ofmono-anabelian transport (and
hence with IUTch!):
(MAT1) the assignment “q ↦→ ql” corresponds to thelink involved, i.e., such as
the Θ-link of IUTch;
(MAT2) the dilation aspect of this assignment corresponds to the eﬀect of the
link onFrobenius-likeobjects;
(MAT3) the isometry aspect of this assignment corresponds to the eﬀect of the
link on´etale-like objects (cf., e.g., theswitching symmetrydiscussed
in (EtMn), which plays a crucial role in establishing themultiradial algo-
rithms of IUTch!);
(MAT4) the ampleness of “ω”, which may thought of as a sort of manifestation
of hyperbolicity, corresponds to themono-anabelian properties that
are applied in the technique of mono-anabelian transport, i.e., properties
that ensure that the isometry (e.g., ´etale-like) aspect is“suﬃciently rich”
to capture the objects of interest in their entirety.
Another fundamental “classical example” is theanalogy between themulti-
radial representation algorithms developed in IUTch (i.e., [IUTchIII], Theo-
rem 3.11) and the classical theory ofconnections, which we consider here from
the point of view ofGrothendieck’s deﬁnition of the notion of a connection, i.e.,
the point of view that gave rise to the notion of acrystal. A detailed discussion
of this analogy — which includes a discussion of the analogy between themain
results of IUTch (i.e., [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11; [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12) and
the classical argumentused to prove thegeometric version of the Szpiro Conjecture
by considering theKodaira-Spencer morphism— may be found in [Alien],§3.1, (v).
That is to say,
(MlCr1) just as the structure of acrystal allows one to relate liftings of an object
to distinct nilpotent thickeningsof agiven (say, reduced) schemethat
coincide over the given scheme,
(MlCr2) the multiradial representation algorithmsdeveloped in IUTch (i.e.,
[IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11 — cf. also the discussion of [IUTchIII], Remark
3.11.1) allow one to relate distinct ring-theoretic realizations, i.e., via
{qj2
} or q (which correspond todistinct thickenings), of thegluing data
thatappears intheΘ-link, i.e., “prime-strips”ofacertaintype (whichcor-
respond to the object associated by a crystal to thegiven reduced scheme,
i.e., for instance, apositive characteristic scheme).
Here, we recall (cf. the discussion at the beginning of [Alien],§3.1, (v)) that this
analogy — which involves a comparison between degrees of ample line bundles (i.e.,
“heights”) and “0” (i.e., as opposed to some large positive multiple of the “height”)
— may be thought of as a sort oflimiting versionof a transformation of the form
q ↦→ qN

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 39
(cf. (DsGl)) as N → +∞. The analogy between (MlCr1) and (MlCr2) is also of
interest from ahistorical point of view:
(MlCrH1) just as the classical scheme-theoretic argument of [Alien],§3.1, (v), which
presents the Kodaira-Spencer morphism from the point of view of (log)
crystals and nilpotent thickenings of (log) schemes,only makes sense if
one considers distinct non-reduced schemes, i.e., distinct thicken-
ings of a given reduced scheme— notions that wereunfamiliar to many
algebraic geometers in the 1960’s, who were accustomed only to work-
ing with more classical notions of “varieties”, e.g., notions that revolve
around consideringcollections of subrings of some ﬁxed ﬁeld,
(MlCrH2) the theory surrounding themain resultsof IUTch (i.e., [IUTchIII], The-
orem 3.11; [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12)only makes senseif one considers
distinct copies of ring/scheme theory(cf. (Smm), (GLR2), (IUAD)!)
glued together along data of the sort that appears in the Θ-link (i.e.,
“prime-strips”of a certain type) — notions that areunfamiliar to many
arithmetic geometers today, who are accustomed only to workingwithin
a ﬁxed copy of scheme theory.
Yet another fundamental “classical example” may be seen inBogomolov’s
proof of thegeometric version of the Szpiro Conjecture. We refer to [BogIUT], as
well as [Alien],§4.3, (iii), for a detailed discussion of the analogy between Bogo-
molov’s proof and IUTch. One way to understand theessential mathematical
phenomenon that underlies Bogomolov’s proof is to consider the followingele-
mentary observation:
(SLZR)T h eunipotent matrices (1 m
01
)
—w h e r em ranges over the positive integers — areconjugate to one
another inSL
2(R), but arenot conjugateto one another inSL2(Z).
Here, we recall that, from the point of view of the classical geometry of the upper
half-plane, the unipotent matrix in (SLZR) may be thought of as themonodromy
operator associatedtothe m-th powerqm ofthe q-parameterq =e x p ( 2πiz)(where
z denotes the standard complex coordinate on the upper half-plane). Bogomolov’s
proof centers around a
(BgCp) comparison between a certain collection of 2× 2 matrices regarded
as elements of SL2(Z) and the same collection of matrices regarded as
elements ofSL2(R), i.e., a comparison (cf. (SLZR)!) between
some ﬁxed/rigid (positive integer) power “qm0”o fq
and
an indeterminate power “qm”o fq
(i.e., wherem ranges over the positive integers) — cf. (DsGl).
Moreprecisely, Bogomolov’sproofinvolvesliftingsofelementsin SL2(R)(or SL2(Z))
to thecanonical extension
1 → Z → SL2(R)∼ → SL2(R) → 1

40 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(or the restriction SL2(Z)∼ of this extension to SL2(Z) ⊆ SL2(R)). From a
more scheme-theoretic point of view, the comparison in Bogomolov’s proof may be
thought of as a comparison between various“realizations of the ﬁrst Chern class”
of the Hodge bundleω(i.e., arising from the invariant diﬀerentials on the tauto-
logical elliptic curve) on the moduli stack of elliptic curvesMell (and its canonical
compactiﬁcation Mell). That is to say:
(Chrn) The“SL2(Z)∼ side”of the comparison in Bogolomov’s proof corresponds
to a sort of geometric version of thecomplex holomorphic realiza-
tion of the ﬁrst Chern class ofω(with compact supports relative to the
compactiﬁcation Mell ⊆Mell), while the“SL2(R)∼ side”of the compar-
ison in Bogolomov’s proof corresponds to a sort ofmetric/diﬀerential-
geometric realizationof the ﬁrst Chern class ofω, via variouscanonical
metrics arising from the hyperbolic geometry of the upper half-plane.
At a more concrete level, the comparison — between the point of view of working
inside SL2(R)∼ and the point of view of working insideSL2(Z)∼ — in Bogomolov’s
proof centers around consideration of a certainrelation
[˜α1, ˜β1]·... ·[˜αg, ˜βg]· ˜γ1 ·... · ˜γr =( ˜τ|∡|)2n∡
(cf. the notation of the discussion of [BogIUT] preceding (B4)) between elements
∈SL2(Z)∼ ⊆SL2(R)∼.T h i s“linking data”(i.e., consisting of the elements
that appear in the aboverelation, together with therelation itself) between the
“SL2(R)∼ side”and “SL2(Z)∼ side”of the comparison in Bogolomov’s proof is
interesting, relative to the analogy with IUTch, in that the “˜γi’s” (fori =1 ,...,r )
correspond to thelocal q-parameters of the family of elliptic curves under consid-
eration, while (the integer power that appears in) “(˜τ|∡|)2n∡
” corresponds to the
(global) heightof the family of elliptic curves under consideration. That is to say,
(LkDt) The local “˜γi’s” (fori =1 ,...,r ) may be understood as corresponding
to the local value group portion (at, say, bad primes) of the gluing
data (i.e., “prime-strips”of a certain type) that appears in the Θ-link,
while the global “(˜τ|∡|)2n∡
” may be understood as corresponding to the
global realiﬁed Frobenioid portion(i.e., global value group portion)
of the gluing data (i.e.,“prime-strips”of a certain type) that appears in
the Θ-link. (Here, we note in passing that one may also interpret the
“[˜αj, ˜βj]’s” (forj =1 ,...,g ) in this context as corresponding to thelocal
unit group portion(at, say,good primes)ofthegluingdata(i.e., “prime-
strips”of a certain type) that appears in the Θ-link, where we recall that
this local unit group portion gives rise, vialog-volume computations of log-
shells,t ot h elog-diﬀerentterm (i.e., an arithmetic analogue of theEuler
characteristic 2−2g) in the bound for the height of an elliptic curve over
a number ﬁeld obtained in [IUTchIV], Theorem 1.10.)
Bogomolov’s proof then proceeds bycomparing
(Bg1) a certaindisplacement estimate—w h i c hi sinvariant with respect to
independent SL2(R)∼-conjugation indeterminacies acting on each of the
linking data elements — that arises from considering the abovelinking
data in SL2(R)∼ (cf. the discussion preceding [BogIUT], (B5))

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 41
with
(Bg2) a certain computation of the heightof the family of elliptic curves
under consideration in terms of thelocalq-parameters(cf. [BogIUT], (B4),
together with the discussion immediately preceding [BogIUT], (B4)) that
arises from considering the abovelinking datain SL2(Z)∼.
Relative to the analogy with IUTch,
(BgIUT1) the displacement estimatein Bogomolov’s proof — which arises from
working with indeterminate powers of q-parameters (cf. the indepen-
dent SL2(R)∼-conjugation indeterminacies!), relative toSL2(R)∼ — cor-
responds to themultiradial representationof IUTch (i.e., [IUTchIII],
Theorem 3.11), while
(BgIUT2) the computation of the height in terms of local q-parameters in
Bogomolov’s proof — which arises from working withrigid powers of
q-parameters, relative to SL2(Z)∼ — corresponds to the argument of
[IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12.
Moreover, in this context, it is of interest to observe, relative to the analogy with
IUTch, that:
(DsInd) This computation via displacement estimates in Bogomolov’s proof
furnishes afascinating and relatively elementaryexample of the phenom-
enon of computing the“size”of aregionsubject toindeterminacies (cf.
(Bg1), (BgIUT1), i.e., the displacement estimates in Bogomolov’s proof,
which areinvariant with respect to theindependent SL2(R)∼-conjugation
indeterminacies acting on each of the linking data elements; the multira-
dial representation of the Θ-pilot object in IUTch) thatapproximates
(say, from above) someregion of interestthat is“rigid”and not subject
to indeterminacies (cf. (Bg2), (BgIUT2), i.e., the linking data in Bogo-
molov’s proof considered inSL2(Z)∼; the Θ-pilot relative to the Θ-hol.
str. in IUTch).
Finally, we observe that the partition of Bogomolov’s proof mentioned above into
(Bg1)/(BgIUT1) and (Bg2)/(BgIUT2) is of interest not only from the point of view
of the correspondence with [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11, and [IUTchIII], Corollary
3.12, but also from ahistorical point of view. Indeed, (Bg1) (though apparently
rediscovered by Bogomolov around the year 2000) wasalready known to Milnor in
the 1950’s, while (Bg2) was, apparently,not known until Bogomolov’s workaround
the year 2000.
§17. The fundamental misunderstandings of IUTchdiscussed in the present report
may be summarized as a failure to understand the following central aspects of
IUTch:
(FM1) the signiﬁcance of the operation ofre-initialization of histories (cf.
(T1), (H2)), the explicit speciﬁcation of types of mathematical
objects (cf. (T2), (H2)), and the use of poly-morphisms (cf. (T4),
(PMInd), (PMEss)) in the construction of mathematical structures (e.g.,
inIUTch)thatadmit switching symmetries(cf. (SW),(Sym), (SWC1),

42 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(SWC2), (SWE1), (SWE2), (LbΘ), (Lblog), (LbMn), (EtΘ), (Etlog),
(EtMn));
(FM2) the signiﬁcance of explicit speciﬁcation of label apparatuses (cf.
(T3), (T5), (IUAD), (SSDLFs), (LbRl), (LbEx1), (LbEx2), (LbEx3),
(LbEx4), (LbEx5), (LbEx6), (LbHT), (LbΘ), (Lblog), (LbMn)) to distin-
guish distinct copiesof various familiar objects that playsubstantively
diﬀerent roleswithin a complicated mathematical structure;
(FM3) the signiﬁcance of the requirement that the various data (i.e., value
group portionand unit group portion) that occurs in thedomain of the
Θ-link arise from asingle ring str.(cf. (ΘCR), (VUSQ), (VUC)) — a
requirement that must be satisﬁed in order to apply themultiradial rep-
resentation algorithms developed in IUTch, i.e., [IUTchIII], Theorem
3.11 (cf. (T3), (SSInd), (GIUT), (SSId), (†ΘCR), (SSIdFs), (SSADFs)).
In this context, we observe that the point of view of (FM1), i.e., of“forgetting
histories”, may, at ﬁrst glance, appear to lie in acontradictory directionto the
point of view of (FM2), i.e., of“remembering labels”. In fact, however, al-
though, depending upon the content of varioustechnical goals, it may be necessary
to “remember”some mathematical structures in some situations and to“forget”
other mathematical structures in other situations,
the common threadthat unites (FM1) and (FM2) is the principle that it is
always of fundamental importance tospecify explicitlywhich structures
one wishes toremember or forget.
One way to summarize (FM1), (FM2), (FM3) is as follows:
(MVEx) Each of (FM1), (FM2), (FM3) centers around the issue of experimenting
with various modiﬁed versions of IUTch to examine to what extent
the essential content of IUTch continues to hold in such modiﬁed versions.
Since, typically, research papers in mathematics (such as, for instance, the papers
[IUTchI], [IUTchII], [IUTchIII], [IUTchIV]!) donot contain any exercises, experi-
menting with various modiﬁed versions of a mathematical theory, i.e., such as those
that appear in (FM1), (FM2), (FM3), is animportant stepin acquiring a deep un-
derstanding of the theory. From this point of view, the experimental versions of
IUTch that appear (either explicitly or implicitly!) in (FM1), (FM2), (FM3) may
be regarded as avaluable pedagogical tool for (both present and future) stu-
dents of IUTch and, in particular, as an important step forward (cf. the discussion
of §3) towards the goal of
completely diagnosing and explicating the logical structure of all misun-
derstandings concerning IUTch.
In particular, one might hope (cf. the discussion of§3) that (FM1), (FM2), (FM3)
may serve to stimulate the further examination and development of such exer-
cises/experimental versions of IUTch.
§18. In the context of the present report, it is important to recall that
(Vrf1) IUTch has been checked, veriﬁed, read and reread,a n dorally exposed
in detail in seminars in its entiretycountless timessince the release of

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 43
preprints on IUTch in August 2012 by a collection of mathematicians (not
including myself) involved in this line of research. (For instance, Fesenko
estimates, in the most recent updated version of§3.1 of his survey [Fsk],
that IUTch has been veriﬁed at least 30 times.) This collection of math-
ematicians has (together with me) also been actively involved in detailed
discussions and dialogues with mathematicians who have any questions
concerning IUTch.
Such discussions have been useful in enhancing the level of understanding of IUTch
by many mathematicians, as well as in ﬁnding minor inessential inaccuracies, mis-
prints, etc. in the preprints on IUTch. Such discussions have also served to conﬁrm
countless times that
(Vrf2) there isno substantive mathematical reasonwhatsoever to suspect
the existence of any oversights, i.e., any ﬂaws or incompleteness of
a mathematically substantive nature, in the numerous veriﬁcations that
have been conducted so far concerning IUTch.
In light of this state of aﬀairs, it should not be surprising that my oral explanations,
over the past few months, to various colleagues involved in (Vrf1), (Vrf2) of the
misunderstandings summarized in§17 were met with aremarkably unanimous
response of utter astonishment and evendisbelief (at times accompanied by
bouts of laughter!) that such manifestly erroneous misunderstandings could have
occurred. At times, this sort of response put me in the somewhat paradoxical
positionofhavingto“justify”or“defend”thelineofreasoningofSSthatapparently
led to such misunderstandings. Put another way,
(CMA) the ﬂaws in IUTch that are alleged in (SSId), (SSAD) — i.e., which
correspond to the mostcentral aspects of themisunderstandings sum-
marized in§17 — are soutterly pronouncedand conspicuous in their
absurdity that it is very diﬃcult to believe that such ﬂaws could have
remained undetected by any competent mathematician for even a few min-
utes, let alone throughout the duration of theintensive veriﬁcation activ-
ities (cf. (Vrf1), (Vrf2)) by quite a number of talented mathematicians
that have been carried out over the years since August 2012.
Careful reﬂection concerning this state of aﬀairs over the months since the March
discussions has led me to the following conclusion:
(DfMth) Perhaps the most reasonable explanation for the state of aﬀairs sum-
marized above in (Vrf1), (Vrf2), (CMA) is that themathematics that SS
perceive as being referred to by the term “IUTch”is simplysubstantially
diﬀerentfrom themathematics that HM(as well as other mathematicians
who have been deeply involved in the various activities concerning IUTch
described in (Vrf1), (Vrf2))understand by the term “IUTch”(cf. (Smm),
(GLR2), (T6), (T7), (T8), (SSId), (SSAD), (DfLb)).
Indeed, at numerous points in the March discussions, I was often tempted to issue
a response of the following form to various assertions of SS (but typically refrained
from doing so!):
Yes! Yes! Of course, I completely agree that the theory that you are
discussing is completely absurd and meaningless, butthat theory is com-
pletely diﬀerent from IUTch!

44 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Nevertheless, the March discussions were productive in the sense that they yielded
a valuable ﬁrst glimpseat themathematical content of the misunderstandingsthat
underlie criticism of IUTch (cf. the discussion of§3). In the present report, we
considered variouspossible causes for these misunderstandings, namely:
(PCM1) lack of suﬃcient time to reﬂect deeply on the mathematics under
discussion (cf. the discussion in the ﬁnal portions of§2, §10);
(PCM2) communication issues and related procedural irregularities (cf.
(T6), (T7), (T8));
(PCM3) a deep sense of discomfort,o r unfamiliarity,w i t hnew ways of
thinking about familiar mathematical objects (cf. the discussion of§16;
[Rpt2014], (T2); [Fsk],§3.3).
On the other hand, the March discussions were, unfortunately, by no means
suﬃcientto yield acomplete elucidationof the logical structure of thecauses
underlying the misunderstandings summarized in§17.
Bibliography
[Rtv] Wikipedia article:Criticism of the theory of relativity, available at:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Criticism of the theory of relativity
[Fsk] I. Fesenko, Arithmetic deformation theory via arithmetic fundamental groups
and nonarchimedean theta-functions, notes on the work of Shinichi Mochizuki,
Eur. J. Math.1 (2015), pp. 405-440; updated version available at:
https://www.maths.nottingham.ac.uk/personal/ibf/notesoniut.pdf
[Gll] Wikipedia article:Galileo Galilei, available at:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galileo Galilei
[FKvid] F. Kato, The abc Conjecture and New Mathematics - Prof. Fumiharu Kato,
Oct 7, 2017 (with English subtitles), video (with English subtitles) available
at:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fNS7N04DLAQ&feature=youtu.be
[IUTchI] S. Mochizuki, Inter-universal Teichm¨uller Theory I: Construction of Hodge
Theaters, RIMS Preprint1756 (August 2012).
[IUTchII] S. Mochizuki,Inter-universal Teichm¨uller Theory II: Hodge-Arakelov-theoretic
Evaluation, RIMS Preprint1757 (August 2012).
[IUTchIII] S. Mochizuki, Inter-universal Teichm¨uller Theory III: Canonical Splittings of
the Log-theta-lattice, RIMS Preprint1758 (August 2012).
[IUTchIV] S. Mochizuki, Inter-universal Teichm¨uller Theory IV: Log-volume Computa-
tions and Set-theoretic Foundations, RIMS Preprint1759 (August 2012).
[Rpt2014] S. Mochizuki, On the Veriﬁcation of Inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory: a
Progress Report (as of December 2014), December 2014, available at:

DISCUSSIONS ON IUTCH (MARCH 15 – 20, 2018) 45
http://www.kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp/~motizuki/IUTeich%20Verification
%20Report%202014-12.pdf
[QC2016] S. Mochizuki, On Questions and Comments Concerning Inter-universal Te-
ichmller Theory (IUT), July 2016, available at:
http://www.kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp/~motizuki/Questions%20and%20
Comments%20on%20IUT.pdf
[Alien] S. Mochizuki,The Mathematics of Mutually Alien Copies: from Gaussian Inte-
grals to Inter-universal Teichm¨uller Theory, RIMS Preprint1854 (July 2016).
[BogIUT] S. Mochizuki, Bogomolov’s proof of the geometric version of the Szpiro Con-
jecture from the point of view of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory,Res. Math.
Sci. 3 (2016), 3:6.
[Ymgt] S. Yamagata, A counterexample for the local analogy of a theorem by Iwasawa
and Uchida,Proc. Japan Acad.52 (1976), pp. 276-278.
Updated versions of preprints are available at the following webpage:
http://www.kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp/~motizuki/papers-english.html