COMMENTS ON “SEMI-GRAPHS OF ANABELIOIDS”
Shinichi Mochizuki
May 2020
(1.) In the third sentence of Example 2.10, the phrase “Now observe that a hyper-
bolic Riemann surface of ﬁnite type” should read“Now observe that a hyperbolic
Riemann surface of ﬁnite type of genus≥1”.
(2.) With regard to the proof of Corollary 3.11:
(i) In the ﬁrst line of the proof, it should be stipulated that the set Σ be
nonempty.
(ii) The phrase “as in (ii)”in line 2 of observation (iv) should read“as in
(iii)”.
(iii) A more detailed version of the argument used to verify observation (iv) is
given in [AbsTopII], Corollary 2.11.
(3.) In the discussion of the“pro-Σversion” of Corollary 3.11in Remark 3.11.1,
one shouldassume that pα,pβ∈Σ.
In fact, this assumption is, in some sense,implicit in the phraseology that appears
in the ﬁrst two lines of Remark 3.11.1, but it should have been statedexplicitly.
(4.) Note that in Theorem 5.4, the case where A is trivial [i.e., is equal to the
anabelioid associated to thetrivial group{1}]i snot excluded. Thus, suppose that,
in Theorem 5.4, we assume further thatA is trivial. Then let usobserve that this
implies that the underlying graph ofG [orH] consists of asingle vertexandno edges.
[Indeed, if the underlying graph ofG has at least one edge, then sinceG is assumed
to betotally elevated, it follows from the assumption thatG is totally arithmetically
estranged [cf. Deﬁnition 5.3, (ii)] that Πtemp
G admits a closed subgroup thatfails
to be arithmetically ample, hence that ΠA = {1} contains a closed subgroup which
is not open—a contradiction.] Thus, Πtemp
G itself is averticial subgroupof Πtemp
G ,
hence compact. In particular, Πtemp
G is the unique maximal compact subgroupof
Πtemp
G , so assertions (i), (ii), and (iii) of Theorem 5.4 are, in essence,vacuous.
Typeset by AMS-TEX
1

2 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(5.) In the line 2 of Example 5.6, the phrase “Also, Suppose...” should read “Also,
suppose...”. In lines 7–8 of Example 5.6, one should also assume thatMi was
chosen so that the resulting Galois action on the dual semi-graph with compact
structure of the special ﬁber of the stable model is trivial [i.e., so as to ensure
that the assumption of Theorem 5.4 concerning switching the branches of edges is
satisﬁed].
(6.) Some readers may ﬁnd the argument given in the third and fourth paragraphs
of the proof of Theorem 3.7, (iii), to be a bit confusing in its brevity. A more
detailed argument may be given as follows. Fori ∈I,l e tu sw r i t e
Vi, Ei
for the sets ofvertices and closed edges, respectively, ofGi,∞ that areﬁxed by the
action ofH.T h u s ,f o ri ≥j ∈I,w eh a v en a t u r a lm a p sVi → Vj, Ei → Ej;l e tu s
write
Ej,i ⊆Ej
for the image ofEi in Ej.T h u s ,f o ri1,i 2 ∈I such thati1 ≥i2,w eh a v eEj,i1 ⊆
Ej,i2 ⊆ Ej. Also, we recall that, by the argument given in the second paragraph
of the proof, we have #Vi ≥ 1 [where we use the notation “#” to denote the
cardinality of a set], for alli ∈I. For simplicity, in the following, we assume that
the semi-graph Gi is untangled, for alli ∈I.N o w :
(a) Suppose that for some coﬁnal subsetJ ⊆I,w eh a v e#Vj = 1, for all
j ∈J. Then the unique elements of theVj,f o rj ∈J,f o r macompatible
system of vertices ﬁxed byH. Thus, we conclude thatH is contained in
some verticial subgroupof πtemp
1 (G).
(b) Suppose that for some coﬁnal subsetJ ⊆I,w eh a v e#Vj ≥2, for all
j ∈J. Then it follows from Lemma 1.8, (ii), (b), that #Ej ≥1, for all
j ∈J.N o wIclaim that for eachj ∈J, the following condition holds:
(∗j) there exists ani ∈J such thati ≥j and #Ej,i =1 .
Indeed, suppose that (∗j) fails to hold.T h e nf o re a c hi ≥j in J,t h e r e
exists a pair ofdistinct edgesei,e′
i ∈Ei whose respective imagesej,i,e′
j,i ∈
Ej are distinct. By Lemma 1.8, (ii), (b), we may assume without loss of
the generality that the pair{ei,e′
i}, hence also the pair{ej,i,e′
j,i}, forms a
subjoint.T h e ns i n c eGj is untangled, it follows that the respective images
fj,i,f′
j,i ofej,i,e′
j,i in Gj alsoforma subjoint.W r i t efi,f′
i fortherespective
images ofei, e′
i in Gi. Thus, it follows from the fact that the pair (fj,i,f ′
j,i)
forms a subjoint (of Gj) that the pair (fi,f ′
i) forms a subjoint (of Gi).
Moreover, for some coﬁnal subsetJ∗ ⊆J,t h es u b j o i n t s(fi,f ′
i), where
i ∈J∗, converge, in the proﬁnite topology, to someproﬁnite subjoint.A s
discussed in the third paragraph, this leads to acontradiction, in light of
our assumption thatG is totally estranged. This completes the proof of
the claim. Now it follows from (∗j)t h a te a c ho ft h enonempty sets Ej,i,

COMMENTS ON “SEMI-GRAPHS OF ANABELIOIDS” 3
for i,j ∈J such thati is “suﬃciently large”relative toj, is of cardinality
1. But this implies that each intersection
Ej,∞
def
=
⋂
i≥j
Ej,i
is of cardinality 1. Thus, the unique elements of theEj,∞,f o rj ∈J, form
a compatible system of closed edges ﬁxed byH. In particular, we conclude
that H is contained in someedge-like subgroup, hence also intwo distinct
verticial subgroups,o fπtemp
1 (G).
(c) Now it follows formally from (a), (b) thatH is always contained insome
verticial subgroupof πtemp
1 (G). If H is contained inthree distinct verticial
subgroups, then it follows immediately from Lemma 1.8, (ii), (b), that one
obtains a contradiction to the condition (∗j) of (b). This completes the
proof of assertion (iii) of Theorem 3.7.
(7.) In Proposition 4.4, (ii), the notation “G” should read “G”.
(8.) In the context of Theorem 4.8, it should be observed thatGi is assumed to
be a graph [i.e., not an arbitrary semi-graph!] of anabelioids. Also, it should be
observed that it follows immediately from the assumption thatGi is totally aloof,
together with the deﬁnition of the categoryLoc(Gi,Γi), that the map induced on
branches of underlying semi-graphs by a locally trivial morphism ofLoc(Gi,Γi)i s
completely determinedby the map induced [by the morphism under consideration]
on vertices of underlying semi-graphs.
(9.) The assertion stated in the second display of Remark 2.4.2 isfalse as stated.
[The automorphisms of the semi-graphs of anabelioids in Example 2.10 that arise
from “Dehn twists”constitute a well-known counterexample to thisassertion.] This
assertion should be replaced by the following slightly modiﬁed version of thisas-
sertion:
The isomorphism classes of theφv completely determine the isomorphism
c l a s so fe a c ho ft h eφe, as well as each isomorphismφb, up to composi-
tion with an automorphism of the composite 1-morphism of anabelioids
Ge →H f →H w that arises from an automorphism of the 1-morphism of
anabelioids Ge →H f.
Also, in thediscussion following thisassertion [as well as the various places where
this discussion is applied, i.e., Remark 3.5.2; the second paragraph of§4; Deﬁnition
5.1, (iv)], it is necessary to assume further that the semi-graphs of anabelioids that
appear satisfy the condition thatevery edge abuts to at least one vertex.
(10.) The phrase “isGalois” at the end of the ﬁrst sentence of the proof of Propo-
sition 3.2 should read “is a countable coproduct ofGalois objects”.

4 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(11.) In the ﬁrst sentence of Deﬁnition 3.5, (ii), the phrase “Suppose that” should
read “Suppose that each connected component of”; the phrase “splitsthe restriction
of” should read “splits the restriction of this connected component of”.
(12.) Certain pathologies occur in the theory of tempered fundamental groups if
one does not impose suitablecountability hypotheses.
(i) In order to discuss these countability hypotheses, it will be convenient to
introduce someterminology as follows:
(T1) We shall say that a tempered group is Galois-countable if its topol-
ogy admits a countable basis. We shall say that a connected temperoid
is Galois-countable if it arises from a Galois-countable tempered group.
We shall say that a temperoid isGalois-countable if it arises from a col-
lection of Galois-countable connected temperoids. We shall say that a
connected quasi-temperoid isGalois-countable if it arises from a Galois-
countable connected temperoid. We shall say that a quasi-temperoid is
Galois-countableif it arises from a collection of Galois-countableconnected
quasi-temperoids.
(T2) We shall say that a semi-graph of anabelioidsG is Galois-countable if it
is countable, and, moreover, admits a countable collection of ﬁnite ´etale
coverings {Gi →G }i∈I such that for any ﬁnite ´etale covering H→G ,
there exists ani ∈I such that the base-changed coveringH× G Gi →G i
splits over the constituent anabelioid associated to each component of [the
underlying semi-graph of]Gi.
(T3) We shall say that a semi-graph of anabelioidsG is strictly coherentif it
is coherent [cf. Deﬁnition 2.3, (iii)], and, moreover, each of the proﬁnite
groups associated to components c of [the underlying semi-graph of] G
[cf. the ﬁnal sentence of Deﬁnition 2.3, (iii)] istopologically generated by
N generators, for some positive integerN that is independent of c.I n
particular, it follows that if G is ﬁnite and coherent,t h e ni ti sstrictly
coherent.
(T4) One veriﬁes immediately that every strictly coherent, countable semi-
graph of anabelioids isGalois-countable.
(T5) One veriﬁes immediately that if, in Remark 3.2.1, one assumes in addi-
tion that the temperoidX is Galois-countable, then it follows that its as-
sociated tempered fundamental groupπtemp
1 (X)i swell-deﬁned and Galois-
countable.
(T6) One veriﬁes immediately that if, in the discussion of the paragraph
preceding Proposition 3.6, one assumes in addition that the semi-graph
of anabelioids G is Galois-countable, then it follows that its associated
tempered fundamental groupπtemp
1 (G)a n dtemperoid Btemp(G)a r ewell-
deﬁned and Galois-countable.
Here, we note that, in (T5) and (T6), theGalois-countability assumption is nec-
essary in order to ensure that the index sets of“universal covering pro-objects”

COMMENTS ON “SEMI-GRAPHS OF ANABELIOIDS” 5
implicit in the deﬁnition of thetempered fundamental groupmay to be taken to
be countable. This countability of the index sets involved implies that the various
objects that constitute such a universal covering pro-object admit acompatible sys-
tem of basepoints, i.e., that theobstruction to the existence of such a compatible
system — which may be thought of as an element of a sort of “nonabelianR1 lim←−”
— vanishes. In order to deﬁne the tempered fundamental group in an intrinsi-
cally meaningful fashion, it is necessary to know the existence of such a compatible
system of basepoints.
(ii) The eﬀectsof the omission of Galois-countability hypothesesin §3o nt h e
remainder of the present paper, as well as on subsequent papers of the author, may
be summarized as follows:
(E1) First of all, we observe that all topological subquotients ofabsolute Galois
groups of ﬁelds of countable cardinalityare Galois-countable.
(E2) Also, we observe that ifk is a ﬁeld whose absolute Galois group isGalois-
countable,a n dU is a nonempty open subscheme of a connected proper
k-scheme X that arises as the underlying scheme of a log scheme that is
log smooth overk [where we regard Spec(k) as equipped with the trivial
log structure], and whose interior is equal toU, then thetamely ramiﬁed
arithmetic fundamental groupof U [i.e., that arises by considering ﬁnite
´etale coverings ofU with tame ramiﬁcation over the divisors that lie in
the complement ofU in X] is itselfGalois-countable [cf., e.g., [AbsTopI],
Proposition 2.2].
(E3) Next, we observe, with regard to Examples 2.10, 3.10, and 5.6, that
the tempered groups and temperoids that appear in these Examples are
Galois-countable[cf. (E1), (E2)], while the semi-graphs of anabelioids that
appear in these Examples arestrictly coherent[cf. item (T3) of (i)], hence
[cf. item (T4) of (i)]Galois-countable. In particular, there isno eﬀecton
the theory of objects discussed in these Examples.
(E4) It follows immediately from (E3) that there isno eﬀecton §6.
(E5) It follows immediately from items (T3), (T4) of (i), together with the
assumptions ofﬁniteness and coherencein the discussion of the paragraph
immediately preceding Deﬁnition 4.2, the assumption ofcoherencein Def-
inition 5.1, (i), and the assumption of Deﬁnition 5.1, (i), (d), that there
is no eﬀecton §4, §5. [Here, we note that since the notion of atempered
covering of a semi-graph of anabelioids is only deﬁned in the case where
the semi-graph of anabelioids iscountable, it is implicit in Proposition 5.2
and Deﬁnition 5.3 that the semi-graphs of anabelioids under consideration
are countable.]
(E6) There isno eﬀecton §1, §2, or the Appendix, sincetempered fundamental
groups are never discussedin §1, §2, or the Appendix.
(E7) IntheDeﬁnitions/Propositions/Theorems/Corollariesnumbered3.2, 3.3,
3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7, 3.8, 3.9, one must assume that all tempered groups, tem-
peroids, and semi-graphs of anabelioids that appear areGalois-countable.

6 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
On the other hand, it follows immediately from (E1), (E2), and (E3) that
there isno eﬀecton the remaining portions of§3.
(E8) In [QuCnf] and [FrdII], one must assume that all tempered groups and
[quasi-]temperoids that appear areGalois-countable.
(E9) There is no eﬀecton any papers of the author other than the present
paper and the papers discussed in (E8).
(13.) In order to carry out the argument stated in the proof of Proposition 5.2,
(i), it is necessary tostrengthen the conditions (c) and (d) of Deﬁnition 5.1, (i), as
follows. This strengthening of the conditions (c) and (d) of Deﬁnition 5.1, (i), has
no eﬀecteither on the remainder of the present paper or on subsequent papers of
the author. Suppose thatG is as in Deﬁnition 5.1, (i). Then we begin by making
the followingobservation:
(O1) Suppose that G is ﬁnite.T h e nG admits a coﬁnal, countablecollection
of connected ﬁnite ´etale Galois coverings{Gi →G }i∈I,e a c ho fw h i c hi s
characteristic [i.e., any pull-back of the covering via an element of Aut(G)
is isomorphic to the original covering]. [For instance, one veriﬁes immedi-
ately, by applying theﬁniteness and coherenceof G, that such a collection
of coverings may be obtained by considering, forn a positive integer, the
compositeof all connected ﬁnite ´etale Galois coverings of degree≤n.] We
may assume, without loss of generality, that this collection of coverings
arises from aprojective system, which we denote by˜G. Thus, we obtain a
natural exact sequence
1 −→ Gal( ˜G/G) −→ Aut( ˜G/G) −→ Aut(G) −→ 1
— where we write “Aut(˜G/G)” for the group of pairs ofcompatibleauto-
morphisms of ˜G and G.
This observation (O1) has the following immediate consequence:
(O2) Suppose that we are in the situation of (O1). Consider, fori ∈I,t h e
ﬁnite index normal subgroup
Auti( ˜G/G) ⊆ Aut( ˜G/G)
of elements of Aut(˜G/G) that induce theidentity automorphism on the
underlying semi-graphGi of Gi, as well as on Gal(Gi/G). Then one veriﬁes
immediately [from the deﬁnition of asemi-graph of anabelioids;c f .a l s o
Proposition 2.5, (i)] that the intersection of the Auti( ˜G/G), for i ∈I,i s
= {1}.T h u s , t h e A u ti( ˜G/G), for i ∈I, determine a natural proﬁnite
topology on Aut(˜G/G) and hence also on the quotient Aut(G), which is
easily seen to be compatible with the proﬁnite topology on Gal(˜G/G) and,
moreover, independent of the choice of˜G.

COMMENTS ON “SEMI-GRAPHS OF ANABELIOIDS” 7
The new versionof the condition (c) of Deﬁnition 5.1, (i), that we wish to consider
is the following:
(cnew) The action of H on G is trivial; the resulting homomorphism H →
Aut(G[c]), where c ranges over thecomponents [i.e., vertices and edges]
of G,i s continuous [i.e., relative to the natural proﬁnite group topology
deﬁned in (O2) on Aut(G[c])].
It is immediate that (cnew) implies (c). Moreover, we observe in passing that:
(O3) In fact, since H is topologically ﬁnitely generated [cf. Deﬁnition 5.1,
(i), (a)], it holds [cf. [NS], Theorem 1.1] thatevery ﬁnite index subgroup
of H is open in H. Thus, the conditions (c) and (c new) in fact hold
automatically.
The new versionof the condition (d) of Deﬁnition 5.1, (i), that we wish to consider
is the following:
(dnew)T h e r e i s aﬁnite set C∗ of components [i.e., vertices and edges] of G
such that for every component c of G, there exists a c∗ ∈C∗ and an
isomorphism of semi-graphs of anabelioidsG[c]
∼
→G [c∗]t h a ti scompatible
with the action ofH on both sides.
It is immediate that (dnew) implies (d). The reason that, in the context of the proof
of Proposition 5.2, (i), it is necessary to consider thestronger conditions(cnew)a n d
(dnew) is as follows. It suﬃces to show that, given aconnected ﬁnite ´etale covering
G′ →G , after possibly replacingH by an open subgroup ofH, the action ofH on
G lifts to an action onG′ that satisﬁes the conditions of Deﬁnition 5.1, (i). Such
a lifting of the action ofH on G to an action on the portion ofG′ that lies over
the vertices of G follows in a straightforward manner from theoriginal conditions
(a), (b), (c), and (d). On the other hand, in order to conclude that such a lifting is
[after possibly replacingH by an open subgroup ofH] compatible with the gluing
conditions arising from the structure ofG′ over theedges of G, it is necessary to
assume further that the“component-wise versions (cnew), (dnew)”of the original
“vertex-wise conditions (c), (d)”hold. This issue is closely related to the issue
discussed in (9.) above.
(14.) In Deﬁnition 2.4, (iii), the phrase “underlying graph” should read “underlying
semi-graph” (2 instances).
(15.) Intheﬁrstsentenceofthefourthparagraphofthediscussionentitled“Curves”
in §0, the notation “Dg,r ⊆Mg,r” should read “Dg,r ⊆Cg,r”.
Bibliography
[QuCnf] S. Mochizuki, Conformal and quasiconformal categorical representation of hy-
perbolic Riemann surfaces,Hiroshima Math. J.36 (2006), pp. 405-441.

8 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
[FrdII] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of Frobenioids II: Poly-Frobenioids,Kyushu J.
Math. 62 (2008), pp. 401-460.
[AbsTopI] S. Mochizuki, Topics in Absolute Anabelian Geometry I: Generalities,J. Math.
Sci. Univ. Tokyo19 (2012), pp. 139-242.
[AbsTopII] S.Mochizuki,TopicsinAbsoluteAnabelianGeometryII:DecompositionGroups
and Endomorphisms,J. Math. Sci. Univ. Tokyo20 (2013), pp. 171-269.
[NS] N. Nikolov and D. Segal, Finite index subgroups in proﬁnite groups,C. R.
Math. Acad. Sci. Paris337 (2003), pp. 303-308.