The Hodge-Arakelov Theory of Elliptic Curves:
Global Discretization of Local Hodge Theories
by Shinichi Mochizuki
September 1999
Table of Contents
Introduction
§1. Statement of the Main Results
§2. Technical Roots: the Work of Mumford and Zhang
§3. Conceptual Roots: the Search for a Global Hodge Theory
§3.1. From Absolute Diﬀerentiation to Comparison Isomorphisms
§3.2. A Function-Theoretic Comparison Isomorphism
§3.3. The Meaning of Nonlinearity
§3.4. Hodge Theory at Finite Resolution
§3.5. Relationship to Ordinary Frobenius Liftings and Anabelian Varieties
§4. Guide to the Text
§5. Future Directions
§5.1. Gaussian Poles and the Theta Convolution
§5.2. Higher Dimensional Abelian Varieties and Hyperbolic Curves
Chapter I: Torsors in Arakelov Theory
§0. Introduction
§1. Arakelov Theory in Geometric Dimension Zero
§2. Deﬁnition and First Properties of Torsors
§3. Splittings with Bounded Denominators
§4. Examples from Geometry
Chapter II: The Galois Action on Torsion Points
§0. Introduction
§1. Some Elementary Group Theory
§2. The Height of an Elliptic Curve
§3. The Galois Action on the Torsion of a Tate Curve
§4. An Eﬀective Estimate of the Image of Galois
1

Chapter III: The Universal Extension of a Log Elliptic Curve
§0. Introduction
§1. Deﬁnition of the Universal Extension
§2. Canonical Splitting at Inﬁnity
§3. Canonical Splittings in the Complex Case
§4. Hodge-Theoretic Interpretation of the Universal Extension
§5. Analytic Continuation of the Canonical Splitting
§6. Higher Schottky-Weierstrass Zeta Functions
§7. Canonical Schottky-Weierstrass Zeta Functions
Chapter IV: Theta Groups and Theta Functions
§0. Introduction
§1. Mumford’s Algebraic Theta Functions
§2. Theta Actions and the Schottky Uniformization
§3. Twisted Schottky-Weierstrass Zeta Functions
§4. Zhang’s Theory of Metrized Line Bundles
§5. Theta Groups and Metrized Line Bundles
Chapter V: The Evaluation Map
§0. Introduction
§1. Construction of Certain Metrized Line Bundles
§2. The Deﬁnition of the Evaluation Map
§3. Extension of the Etale-Integral Structure
§4. Linear Relations Among Higher Schottky-Weierstrass Zeta Functions
§5. The Determinant of the Evaluation Map
§6. The Generic Case
Chapter VI: The Scheme-Theoretic Comparison Theorem
§0. Introduction
§1. Deﬁnition of a New Integral Structure at Inﬁnity
§2. Compatibility with Base-Change
§3. The Comparison Isomorphism in Characteristic Zero
§4. The Comparison Isomorphism in Mixed Characteristic
Chapter VII: The Geometry of Function Spaces: Systems of Orthogonal Functions
§0. Introduction
§1. The Orthogonalization Problem
§2. Review of Legendre and Hermite Polynomials
§3. Discrete Tchebycheﬀ Polynomials and the Fundamental Combinatorial Model
§4. The K¨ahler Geometry of a Polarized Elliptic Curve
§5. The Relationship Between de Rham and Canonical Schottky-Weierstrass Zeta Functions
§6. Diﬀerential Calculus on the Theta-Weighted Circle
2

Chapter VIII: The Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Theorem
§0. Introduction
§1. Averages of Metrics
§2. The Legendre Model
§3. The Truncated Binomial Model
§4. The Combinatorics of the Full Binomial Model
§5. The Full Binomial Model
§6. Relations Among Various Norms and Zeta Functions
§7. The Comparison Isomorphism at the Inﬁnite Prime
Chapter IX: The Arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer Morphism
§0. Introduction
§1. The Complex Case:
The Classical “Modular Theory” of the Upper Half-Plane
§2. The p-adic Case:
The Hodge-Tate Decomposition as an Evaluation Map
§3. The Global Arithmetic Case:
Application of the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism
Appendix: Formal Uniformization of Smooth Abelian Group Schemes
3

Introduction
§1. Statement of the Main Results
The main result of this paper is a Comparison Theorem (cf. Theorem A below) for
elliptic curves, which states roughly that:
The space of “polynomial functions” of degree (roughly)<d on the uni-
versal extension of an elliptic curve maps isomorphically via restriction
to the space of (set-theoretic) functions on the d-torsion points of the
universal extension.
This rough statement is essentially precise for (smooth) elliptic curves over ﬁelds of char-
acteristic zero. For elliptic curves in mixed characteristic and degenerating elliptic curves,
this statement may be made precise (i.e., the restriction map becomes an isomorphism)
if one modiﬁes the “integral structure” on the space of polynomial functions in an appro-
priate fashion. Similarly, in the case of elliptic curves over the complex numbers, one can
ask whether or not one obtains an isometry if one puts natural archimedean metrics on
the spaces involved. In this paper, we also compute precisely what modiﬁcation to the
integral structure/metricsin all of these cases (i.e., atp-adic and archimedean primes, and
for degenerating elliptic curves) is necessary to obtain an isomorphism(or something very
close to an isomorphism).
In characteristic zero, the universal extension of an elliptic curve may be regarded as
the de Rham cohomology of the elliptic curve , with coeﬃcients in the sheaf of invertible
functions on the curve. On the other hand, the torsion points of the elliptic curve may
be regarded as a portion of the ´etale cohomology of the elliptic curve .T h u s , o n e m a y
regard this Comparison Theorem as a sort of isomorphism between the de Rham and ´etale
cohomologies of the elliptic curve, given by consideringfunctions on each of the respective
cohomology spaces. When regarded from this point of view,this Comparison Theorem may
be thought of as a sort of discrete or Arakelov-theoretic analogue of the usual comparison
theorems between de Rham and ´etale/singular cohomologyin the complex andp-adic cases.
This analogy with the “classical” local comparison theorems can be made very precise,
and is one of the main topics of Chapter IX.
Using this point of view, we apply the Comparison Theorem to construct
a global/Arakelov-theoretic analoguefor elliptic curves over number ﬁelds
of the Kodaira-Spencer morphism of a family of elliptic curves over a
geometric base.
This arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphismis studied in Chapter IX.
4

Suppose that E is an elliptic curve over a ﬁeld K of characteristic zero.L e t d be a
positive integer, and η ∈ E(K) a torsion point of order not dividing d.W r i t e
L
def
= OE(d · [η])
for the line bundle on E corresponding to the divisor of multiplicityd with support at the
point η.W r i t e
E† → E
for the universal extension of the elliptic curve , i.e., the moduli space of pairs (M, ∇M )
consisting of a degree zero line bundleM on E, together with a connection∇M .T h u s ,E†
is an aﬃne torsor on E under the module ωE of invariant diﬀerentials onE.I np a r t i c u l a r ,
since E† is (Zariski locally over E) the spectrum of a polynomial algebra in one variable
with coeﬃcients in the sheaf of functions on E, it makes sense to speak of the “relative
degree over E” – which we refer to in this paper as the torsorial degree – of a function on
E† . Note that (since we are in characteristic zero) the subscheme dE† ⊆ E† of d-torsion
points of E† maps isomorphically to the subschemedE ⊆ E of d-torsion points ofE.T h e n
in its simplest form, the main result of this paper states the following:
Theorem Asimple. Let E be an elliptic curve over a ﬁeld K of characteristic zero. Write
E† → E for its universal extension. Let d be a positive integer, and η ∈ E(K) a torsion
point whose order does not divide d. Write L
def
= OE(d · [η]). Then the natural map
Γ(E† , L)<d →L |
dE†
given by restricting sections of L over E† whose torsorial degree is <d to the d-torsion
points of E† is a bijection between K-vector spaces of dimension d2.
The remainder of the main theorem essentially consists of specifying preciselyhow one must
modify the integral structure of Γ(E† , L)<d over more general bases in order to obtain an
isomorphism at the ﬁnite and inﬁnite primes of a number ﬁeld, as well as for degenerating
elliptic curves.
To state the main theorem in its more general form, it is natural to work over a ﬁne
noetherian log schemeSlog (cf. [Kato]). Over the base Slog, we consider what we call alog
elliptic curve
Clog → Slog
(cf. Chapter III, Deﬁnition 1.1), i.e., the result of pulling back, via some morphismSlog →
(M
log
1,0)Z,t h euniversal log curve Clog → (M
log
1,0)Z. Here, ( M
log
1,0)Z is the log moduli stack
5

of elliptic curves over Z, equipped with its natural log structure deﬁned by the divisor at
inﬁnity, and C→ (M1,0)Z is the unique (proper) semi-stable curve of genus 1, which we
equip with the log structure deﬁned by the divisor inC which is the pull-back of the divisor
at inﬁnity of ( M1,0)Z.
In the general version of the main theorem, we must use line bundles – which play
the role of the line bundle L in Theorem Asimple – equipped with a metric as in [Zh] in
a neighborhood of the divisor at inﬁnity D ⊆ S. These metrized line bundles “ L” live
on a “Zhang-theoretic version” E∞ ,S → S∞ of Clog → Slog (cf. Chapter IV, §4,5), and
are discussed in detail in Chapter V, §1. For smooth elliptic curves, these line bundles are
exactly the same as the line bundle “ L” of Theorem Asimple.
Next, it turns out that at ﬁnite primes the universal extension E† → E is not quite
adequate; instead, one must modify it by multiplying the ωE-portion of E† by a factor of
d (cf. Chapter V, §2). The resulting object E†
[d] → E is an ωE-torsor which coincides with
E† over bases on which d is invertible. In a neighborhood of the divisor at inﬁnity, one
must consider a version of E†
[d] which is compatible with Zhang’s theory of metrized line
bundles. This version of E†
[d] is denoted by
E†
∞ ,[d]
(cf. Chapter V, §2). For smooth elliptic curves in characteristic zero, E†
∞ ,[d] is the same
as E† .
In the general form of Theorem A, we would like to consider sections of the metrized
line bundle L over E†
∞ ,[d] of torsorial degree <d . It turns out, however, that if one just
considers the usual global section or push-forward functor in the naive sense, then one
does not get the desired isomorphism at ﬁnite or degenerating primes. In order to get
the desired isomorphism at such primes, one must modify the integral structure at those
primes. The resulting push-forward functor is denoted
(f
S)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{∞ ,et}
(cf. Chapter VI, Deﬁnition 1.3). For smooth elliptic curves in characteristic zero ,t h i s
push-forward is the same as the usual one. Finally, by restricting such sections of L over
E†
∞ ,[d] to the d-torsion points dE†
∞ in E†
∞ ,[d], one obtains an evaluation map
Ξ{∞ ,et} :( fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{∞ ,et}→ (fS)∗(L|
(dE†
∞ )
)
(cf. Chapter V, Proposition 2.2; Chapter VI, Theorem 3.1 (1)). For smooth elliptic curves
in characteristic zero, this is the same as the map considered in Theorem Asimple.
6

We are now ready to state the main theorem of this paper (cf. Chapter VIII, §0,
Theorem A):
Theorem A. (The Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism) Let d, m ≥ 1 be
integers such that m does not divide d. Suppose that Slog is a ﬁne noetherian log scheme,
and let
Clog → Slog
be a log elliptic curve over Slog such that the divisor at inﬁnity D ⊆ S (i.e., the pull-
back of the divisor at inﬁnity of (M1,0)Z via the classifying morphism S → (M1,0)Z)i sa
Cartier divisor on S. Also, let us assume that ´etale locally on the completion of S along
D, the pull-back of the Tate parameter q to this completion admits a d-th root, and that
we are given a torsion point
η ∈ E∞ ,S(S∞ )
of order precisely m which deﬁnes line bundles Lst,η, L
ev
st,η (cf. Chapter V, §1). If d is
odd (respectively, even), then let L
def
= Lst,η (respectively, L
def
= L
ev
st,η). Then:
(1) (Compatibility with Base-Change) The formation of the push-forward (cf.
Chapter VI, Deﬁnition 1.3)
(fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{∞ ,et}
(along with its natural ﬁltration by torsorial degree) commutes with base-change
(among bases Slog satisfying the hypotheses given above).
(2) (Zero Locus of the Determinant) Assume that S is Z-ﬂat . The scheme-
theoretic zero locus of the determinant det(Ξ{∞ ,et}), i.e., the determinant of
the evaluation map (cf. Chapter V, Proposition 2.2; Chapter VI, Theorem 3.1,
(1))
Ξ{∞ ,et} :( fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{∞ ,et}→ (fS)∗(L|
(dE†
∞ )
)
is given by the divisor
d · [η
⋂
(dE)]
7

(where dE is the kernel of multiplication byd on Ed). In fact, the divisor of poles
of the inverse morphism to Ξ{∞ ,et} is contained in the divisor [η ⋂ (dE)].
(3) (Analytic Torsion at the Divisor at Inﬁnity)For eachι, there is a sequence
of elements
aι = {(aι)0,..., (aι)d−1};( aι)j ≈ j2
8d
of Q≥0 · log(q),w h e r e(aι)j goes roughly (as a function of j)a s j2
8d (cf. Chapter
VI, Theorem 3.1, (2)), such that the subquotients of the natural ﬁltration on the
domain of Ξ{∞ ,et} admits natural isomorphisms:
(F
j+1/Fj)((fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{∞ ,et}) −→ 1
j! · exp(−(aι)j) · (fS)∗(L|E∞ ,S ) ⊗OS τ⊗j
E
(where τE is the dual ofωE)f o rj =0 ,...,d −1. Moreover, the sections ofL|
E†
∞ ,[d]
that realize these bijections haveq-expansions in a neighborhood of inﬁnity that
are given explicitly in Chapter V, Theorem 4.8.
(4) (Integrality Properties at the Inﬁnite Prime) Suppose that D = ∅,a n dS
is of ﬁnite type over C. Let us then write L, Ξ, dE† , E†
[d] for L, Ξ{∞ ,et}, dE†
∞ ,
E†
∞ ,[d]. Then one may equip L with a (smooth, i.e., C∞ ) metric |∼| L whose
curvature is translation-invariant on the ﬁbers of E → S. Moreover, such
a metric is unique up to multiplication by a (smooth) positive function onS(C).
Then |∼| L deﬁnes a metric on the vector bundle (fS)∗(L|
dE† ) (i.e., the range
of Ξ), namely, the L2-metric for “ L-valued functions on dE† ” (where we assume
that the total mass of dE† is 1). Since Ξ is an isomorphism, this metric thus
induces a metric on (fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d (i.e., the domain of Ξ), which we denote by
|| ∼ || et
and refer to as the´etale metric. On the other hand, by using the canonical real
analytic splitting of E†
[d](C) → E(C) (i.e., the unique splitting which is a contin-
uous homomorphism), we may split sections of (fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d into components
which are real analytic sections of L⊗ τ⊗r
E (where r<d ) over E(C).S i n c eτE
gets a natural metric by square integration overE, these components have natural
8

L2-norms determined by integrating their|∼| 2
L over the ﬁbers of E(C) → S(C).
This deﬁnes what we refer to as the de Rham metric
|| ∼ || DR
on (fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d. The relationship between the ´etale and de Rham metrics may
be described using three “models”:
(A.) The Hermite Model: This model states that if we ﬁx r<d ,
and let d →∞ , then over any compact subset of S(C),t h e´etale metric
|| ∼ || et on Fr((fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d) converges (up to a factor ≤ eπ+r, ≥ 1)
to the metric || ∼ || DR, as well as to a certain metric “ || ∼ || HMd ”
deﬁned by considering Hermite polynomials scaled by a factor of
(constant)·
√
d in the derivatives of the theta functions∈ (fS)∗(L|E)=
F1((fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d).
(B.) The Legendre Model: This model states (roughly) that over
any compact subset of S(C),ac e r t a i naverage – which we denote
|| ∼ || w,μa – of translates of the ´etale metric || ∼ || et on (fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d
is equal (provided d ≥ 25), up to a factor of (constant)d, to the de
Rham metric || ∼ || DR, as well as to a certain metric “ || ∼ || Tch”d e -
ﬁned by considering discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials scaled by
af a c t o ro fdin the derivatives of the theta functions ∈ (fS)∗(L|E)=
F1((fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d). These discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials are dis-
crete versions of the Legendre polynomials, and in fact, if we letd →∞
with the said scaling by d, then the discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials
converge uniformly to the Legendre polynomials.
(C.) The Binomial Model: This model involves the explicit q-expan-
sions (where we write E = Gm/qZ,a n d q is a holomorphic function
which is deﬁned, at least locally, onS(C)) referred to in (3) above, which
are essentially binomial coeﬃcient polynomials (scaled by 1) in
the derivatives of the theta functions∈ (fS)∗(L|E)= F1((fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d).
If we divide these functions by appropriate powers of q, then the norm
|| ∼ || qCG for which these functions divided by powers of q are or-
thonormal satisﬁes the following property: If d ≥ 12,a n d Im(τ) ≥
200{log2(d)+ n · log(d)+ n · log(n)} (where q =e x p ( 2πiτ)), then:
n−1 · e−32d ·| |∼| | qCG ≤| |∼| | et ≤ e4d ·| |∼| | qCG
9

Here, the factor of n−1 that appears is the exact archimedean ana-
logue of the poles that appeared at ﬁnite primes in (2) above.
Finally, for each of these three models, thecombinatorial/arithmetic portion of the
analytic torsion (i.e., the portion not arising from letting the elliptic curveE degenerate
– cf. (3) above for the portion arising from degeneration of the elliptic curve) induced on
(F
r+1/Fr)((fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d) by the metrics || ∼ || DR; || ∼ || HMd ; || ∼ || Tch; || ∼ || w,μa ;
|| ∼ || qCG (in their respective domains of applicability) as r → d, goes (modulo factors of
the order (constant)d)a s
≈ (r!)−1 ≈ (d!)−1
which is precisely what you would expect by applying the product formula to the com-
putation of the “analytic torsion” in the ﬁnite prime case , which consists of a factor
of precisely (r!)−1 (cf. Chapter V, Theorem 3.1; Chapter VI, Theorem 4.1; Chapter VII,
Proposition 3.4).
In particular, Theorem A, (3), tells us that the necessary modiﬁcation to the integral
structure of the degreej portion of the push-forwardat the p-adic and degenerating primes
is a factor of
1
j! · q
−j2
8d
The factor q
−j2
8d involving the q-parameter is of fundamental importance in the theory of
this paper. Because (as a function of j) this factor varies like a “Gaussian exp(−x2)” and
gives rise to poles (relative to the usual push-forward) in the modiﬁed push-forward that
we consider in Theorem A, we refer to the modiﬁcation in integral structure arising from
this factor as the Gaussian poles. The factor of
1
8d in the exponent may be justiﬁed by the
following calculation: On the one hand, if one thinks in terms of degrees of vector bundles
on (
M1,0)C, the degree of the usual push-forward goes roughly as
d−1∑
j=0
deg(τ⊗j
E )=
d−1∑
j=0
j · deg(τE) ≈ 1
2d2 · deg(τE)= − 1
2d2 · 1
12log(q)= − d2
24 · log(q)
where “log( q)” is a symbol that stands for the element in Pic(( M1,0)C) deﬁned by the
divisor at inﬁnity. (It turns out that the contribution to the degree by the line bundleL is
negligible.) On the other hand, the sum of the degrees resulting from the Gaussian poles
is
d−1∑
j=0
j2
8d · log(q) ≈ 1
3d3 · 1
8d · log(q)= d2
24 · log(q)
10

In other words, the factor of 1
8d is just enough to make the total degree 0. Since the
restriction of L to the torsion points is (essentially) a “torsion line bundle” (i.e., some
tensor power of it is trivial), the degree of the range of the evaluation map is zero – i.e.,the
factor of 1
8d is just enough to make the degrees of the domain and range of the evaluation
map of Theorem A equal (which is natural, since we want this evaluation map to be an
isomorphism). In fact,
It turns out that the proof of the scheme-theoretic portion of Theorem
A in Chapter VI, §3,4, is based on precisely this sort of “summation of
degrees” argument.
In this proof, however, in order to get an exact isomorphism, it is necessary to compute
all the degrees involved precisely. This computation requires a substantial amount of work
(involving, for instance, the theory of [Zh]) and is carried out in Chapters IV, V, VI.
On the other hand, the key point of the archimedean portion of Theorem A is the
comparison of the ´etale and de Rham metrics || ∼ ||
et, || ∼ || DR. Unfortunately, we are
unable to prove a simple sharp result that they always coincide. Instead, we choose three
natural “domains of investigation” – which we refer to asmodels – where we compare these
two metrics using a particular system of functions which are well-adapted to the domain
of investigation in question. One of the most important features of these three models is
that they each have natural scaling factors associated to them. The three models, along
with their natural scaling factors, and natural domains of applicability are as follows:
Hermite Model
(scaling factor = d
1
2 ) : nondegenerating E,ﬁ x e dr<d
Legendre Model (scaling factor = d) : nondegenerating E, varying r<d
Binomial Model (scaling factor = 1) : degenerating E
It is interesting to observe that the exponents appearing in these scaling factors, i.e.,
0, 1
2 ,1, which we refer to as slopes, are precisely the same as the slopes that appear when
one considers the action of Frobenius on the crystalline cohomology of an elliptic curve
at a ﬁnite prime – cf. the discussions at the end of Chapter VII, §3, 6, for more on this
analogy.
Finally, we apply Theorem A to construct an arithmetic analogue of the Kodaira-
Spencer morphism, as follows. In the following discussion, we write
Π
S
def
= π1((Slog)Q,s)
for the algebraic fundamental groupof the baseSlog.T h u s ,i fS
def
=S p e c (OK), where OK is
the ring of integers of a number ﬁeldK,t h e nΠS = Gal(K/K)i st h eabsolute Galois group
of K. In this discussion, we make the technical assumption that if d is even,t h e nΠS acts
trivially on the 2-torsion of the elliptic curve in question. Then it follows from Mumford’s
11

theory of algebraic theta functions that Π S acts naturally (up to poles annihilated by 4)
on the range of the Comparison Isomorphism of Theorem A. Thus, Theorem A tells us
that, by transport of structure, we get an action of ΠS on the domain of the Comparison
Isomorphism which is (roughly) integral at all primes (ﬁnite and inﬁnite). Since this
domain is equipped with a natural Hodge ﬁltration,w et h u sg e tam o r p h i s m
κarith
E :Π S → Filt(HDR)(S)
where Filt(HDR)(S) is a certain ﬂag variety of ﬁltrations of the domain of the Comparison
Isomorphism, which we denote by HDR (since it is a sort of de Rham cohomology). This
morphism, which we refer to as the arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism of the given
family of elliptic curves, has remarkable integrality properties(cf. the discussion preceding
Chapter IX, Deﬁnition 3.4). In Chapter IX, §1,2, we explain in detail how this arithmetic
Kodaira-Spencer morphism is a very precise analogue of the classical Kodaira-Spencer
morphism for families of complex and p-adic elliptic curves (cf. also [Katz2]). In the
construction of all of these Kodaira-Spencer morphisms, the main idea consists, as depicted
in the following diagram:
Kodaira-Spencer morphism
:
motion in base-space ↦→ induced deformation of Hodge ﬁltration
of the idea that the Kodaira-Spencer morphism is the map which associates to a “motion”
in the base-space of a family of elliptic curves, the deformation in the Hodge ﬁltration of
the de Rham cohomology of the elliptic curve induced by the motion. We refer to Chapter
IX for more details.
§2. Technical Roots: the Work of Mumford and Zhang
Let K be an algebraically closed ﬁeld of characteristic 0. Let E be an elliptic curve
over K.L e tL be the line bundle of Theorem A
simple. Then instead of considering sections
of L over E† , one can consider sections of L over E. Such sections may be restricted to
L|dE. Moreover, by the theory ofalgebraic theta functions(cf. [Mumf1,2,3]), the restriction
L|dE of L to the d-torsion points dE ⊆ E has a canonical trivialization L|dE ∼= L|e ⊗K OdE
(where e ∈ E(K) is the zero element) — at least when d is odd. Thus, by composing the
restriction morphism with this trivialization, we obtain a morphism (as in [Mumf1,2,3]):
Γ(E, L) ↪→L | dE ∼= L|e ⊗K OdE
i.e., one may think of sections of L over E as functions on dE. These functions are
Mumford’s “algebraic theta functions.”
12

Now let us observe that dimK(Γ(E, L)) = d, while dimK(L|e ⊗K OdE)= d2.T h a ti s
to say, Mumford’s theory only addresses a fraction (more precisely:1
d) of the functions in
L|e ⊗K OdE. Thus, it is natural to ask:
Is there a natural extension of Mumford’s theory that allows one to give
meaning to all the functions of L|e ⊗K OdE as some sort of “global”
sections of L?
Theorem Asimple provides a natural, aﬃrmative answer to this question: i.e., it states these
functions may be interpreted naturally as the sections of L over the universal extension
E† of torsorial degree <d .
In more classical terms, to consider the universal extension amounts essentially to
considering the derivatives of (classical) theta functions (cf., e.g., [Katz1], Appendix C).
For instance, if one takes K = C,a n dw r i t e s
θτ(z)
def
=
∑
n∈Z
eπiτ·n2
· e2πiz·n
for the “ standard theta function”( w h e r ez ∈ C, τ ∈ H
def
= {w ∈ C | Im(w) > 0}), then
up to the operation of taking the Fourier expansion, this theta function is essentially a
“Gaussian e
πiτ·n2
,” and its derivatives P( ∂
∂z ) · θτ(z)( w h e r eP(−) is a polynomial with
coeﬃcients in C) are given by polynomial multiples of (which are equivalent to derivatives
of) the Gaussian:
P(2πi · n) · eπiτ·n2
Just as theta functions are the “fundamental functions on an elliptic curve” (more precisely:
generate the space of sections ofL over E), these derivatives are the “fundamental functions
on the universal extension of the elliptic curve” (more precisely: generate the space of
sections of L over E† ). This point of view is discussed in more detail in Chapter III,§5, 6,
7; Chapter VII, §6. As one knows from elementary analysis, the most natural polynomial
multiples/derivatives of a Gaussian are those given by theHermite polynomials.I ti st h u s
natural to expect that the Hermite polynomials should appear naturally in the portion
of the theory of this paper concerning the behavior of the comparison isomorphism at
archimedean primes. This intuition is made rigorous in the theory of Chapters IX, X. In
fact, more generally:
The essential model that permeates the theory of this paper is that of
the Gaussian and its derivatives. This model may be seen especially in
the “Gaussian poles,” as well as in the “Hermite model” at the inﬁnite
prime (cf. §1).
13

In the classical theory over C, the most basic derivative of the theta function is the so-
called Weierstrass zeta function(cf. [Katz1], Appendix C). It should thus not be surprising
to the reader that various generalizations of the Weierstrass zeta function – which we refer
to as Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functions(cf. Chapter III, §6, 7) – play a fundamental role
in this paper.
So far, in the above discussion, we concentrated onsmooth elliptic curves. On the other
hand, when one wishes to consider degenerating elliptic curves, Zhang has constructed a
theory of metrized line bundles on such degenerating elliptic curves (cf. [Zh]). In this
theory, one can consider the curvatures of such metrized line bundles, as well as intersec-
tion numbers between two metrized line bundles in a fashion entirely similar to Arakelov
intersection theory. Using Zhang’s theory of metrized line bundles, it is not diﬃcult toex-
tend Mumford’s theory of algebraic theta functionsin a natural fashion to metrized ample
line bundles on degenerating elliptic curves (cf., e.g., Chapter IV, §5, for more details).
Unfortunately, however, just as Mumford’s theory only addresses sections over the original
elliptic curve (as opposed to over the universal extension, as discussed above), Zhang’s
theory also only deals with the theory of metrized line bundles over the original (degener-
ating) elliptic curve. Thus, it is natural to ask whether one can generalize Theorem A
simple
to the case of degenerating elliptic curves in such a way that the resulting generalization
of the portion of Γ(E† , L) arising from sections over E is compatible with Zhang’s theory
of metrized line bundles (and their sections) over E. In other words, it is natural to ask:
Can one “de Rham-ify” the theory of [Zh], so that it addresses the “met-
ric” behavior of sections ofL not only over E, but over E† ,a sw e l l ?
An aﬃrmative answer to this question is given by the theory ofGaussian poles,o r“ analytic
torsion at the divisor at inﬁnity ” – cf. Theorem A, (3) in §1; Chapters V, VI.
Another way to view the relation to Zhang’s theory is the following. One consequence
of the theory of [Zh] is the construction of a natural “metric” (or integral structure) on the
space ω
E of invariant diﬀerentials on a (degenerating) elliptic curve. If we regardωE as a
line bundle on the compactiﬁed moduli space of elliptic curves, then Zhang’s “admissible
metric” onω
E essentially amounts to the (metrized) line bundleωE(− 1
12 ·∞ )( w h e r e∞ is
the divisor at inﬁnity of the moduli space), i.e., the line bundle ωE with integral structure
at inﬁnity modiﬁed by tensoring with O(− 1
12 ·∞ ). Moreover, it follows from Zhang’s
theory that there is a natural trivialization
ωE(− 1
12 ·∞ ) ∼= O
of this metrized line bundle over the moduli space. The 12-th tensor power of this trivializa-
tion is the cuspidal modular form usually denoted “Δ” ([KM], Chapter 8, §8.1). Similarly,
Theorem A, (3), states that by allowing “Gaussian poles” in the sections of Γ(E† , L), one
gets a natural isomorphism between Γ(E† , L) (with this modiﬁed integral structure) and
14

a vector bundle which is trivial (in characteristic zero) over some ﬁnite log ´etale covering
of the compactiﬁed moduli (log) stack of elliptic curves. That is to say,
One may regard the theory of Gaussian poles/analytic torsion at the
divisor at inﬁnity in Theorem A, (3), as a sort of “ GL2-analogue” of
the isomorphism of line bundles (i.e.,Gm-torsors) ωE(− 1
12 ·∞ ) ∼= O —
or, alternatively, a GL2-analogue of the modular form Δ.
Note: The reason that we mention “ GL2” is that the vector bundle on the “´etale side”
of the comparison isomorphism of Theorem A arises naturally (at least in characteristic
zero) from a representation (deﬁned by the Galois action on the d-torsion points) of the
fundamental group of the moduli stack of elliptic curves intoGL
2, whereas the isomorphism
ωE(− 1
12 ·∞ ) ∼= O naturally corresponds to an abelian representation (i.e., a representation
into Gm which is, in fact, of order 12) of this fundamental group – cf. [KM], Chapter 8,
§8.1.
§3. Conceptual Roots: the Search for a Global Hodge Theory
§3.1. From Absolute Diﬀerentiation to Comparison Isomorphisms
Let K be either a number ﬁeld (i.e., a ﬁnite extension of Q)o ra function ﬁeld in
one variable over some coeﬃcient ﬁeld k (which we assume to be algebraically closed in
K). Let S be the unique one-dimensional regular scheme whose closed pointss correspond
naturally (via Zariski localization ofS at s) to the set of all discrete valuations ofK (where
in the function ﬁeld case we assume that the elements of k× are units for the valuations).
We shall call S the complete model of K. Of course, in the number ﬁeld case, it is natural
to “formally append” to S the set of archimedean valuations of K.
Let
E → S
be a one-dimensional, generically proper semi-abelian schemeover S, i.e., EK
def
= E ⊗S K
is an elliptic curve over K with semi-stable reduction everywhere. Then E deﬁnes a
classifying morphism
α : S → (M1,0)Z
to the compactiﬁed moduli stack of elliptic curves over Z. It is natural to endow S with
the log structure arising from the set of closed points at which E → S has bad reduction.
Then α extends to a morphism αlog : Slog → (M
log
1,0)Z in the logarithmic category.
15

Now, in the function ﬁeld case, if we diﬀerentiateα, we obtain theKodaira-Spencer
morphism of E → S:
κE : ω⊗2
E
∼= α∗Ω(M
log
1,0)Z
→ ΩSlog/k
(where ωE is the restriction to the identity section of E → S of the relative cotangent
bundle of E over S). Since ωE is naturally the pull-back via α of an ample line bundle
on (M1,0)Z,a n d κE is typically nonzero (for instance, it is always nonzero if K is of
characteristic zero and E → S is not isotrivial (i.e., trivial after restriction to a ﬁnite
covering of S)), the existence of the Kodaira-Spencer morphism κE gives rise to a bound
on the height of E → S by the degree of Ω Slog/k. The thrust of a family of conjectures
due to Vojta (cf. [Lang], [Vojta]) is that this bound (or at least, a bound roughly similar
to this bound) in the geometric case (i.e., the case when K is a function ﬁeld) also holds
in the “arithmetic case” (i.e., the case when K is a number ﬁeld). Thus,
In order to prove Vojta’s Conjecture in the arithmetic case, it is natural
to attempt to construct some sort of arithmetic analogue of the Kodaira-
Spencer morphism.
Indeed, this point of view of approaching the veriﬁcation of some inequality by ﬁrst trying
to construct “the theory underlying the inequality” is reminiscent of the approach to
proving the Weil Conjectures (which may be thought of as inequalities concerning the
number of rational points of varieties over ﬁnite ﬁelds) by attempting to construct a “Weil
cohomology theory” for varieties over ﬁnite ﬁelds which has enough “good properties” to
allow a natural proof of the Weil Conjectures.
Of course, if one tries to construct any sort of naive analogue of the Kodaira-Spencer
morphism in the arithmetic case, one immediately runs into a multitude of fundamental
obstacles. In some sense, these obstacles revolve around the fact that the ring of rational
integers Z does not admit “a ﬁeld of coeﬃcients” F
1 ⊆ Z. If such a ﬁeld of absolute
constants existed, then one could consider “absolute diﬀerentials ΩZ/F1 ,” or
“Ω OK/F1 ”
Moreover, since moduli spaces tend to be rather absolute and fundamental objects, it
is natural to imagine that if one had a ﬁeld of absolute constants “ F1,” then (M1,0)Z
should descend naturally to an object ( M1,0)F1 over F1, so that one could diﬀerentiate
the classifying morphism α : S → (M1,0)Z in the arithmetic case, as well, to obtain an
arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism
“ κE : ω⊗2
E
∼= α∗Ω(M
log
1,0)F1
→ ΩSlog/F1 ”
and then use this arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism to prove Vojta’s Conjecture con-
cerning the heights of elliptic curves. (Note: In this case, Vojta’s Conjecture is also referred
to as “Szpiro’s Conjecture.”)
16

Unfortunately, this sort of “absolute ﬁeld of constants F1” does not, of course, exist
in any naive sense. Thus, it is natural to look for a more indirect, abstract approach. In
the geometric case, whenk = C, the algebraic curveS deﬁnes a Riemann surfaceS
an.L e t
us write US ⊆ S for the open subobject where the log structure of Slog is trivial. Then
the ﬁrst singular cohomology module of the ﬁbers of E → S naturally forms a local system
H1
sing(E/S, Z)
on the Riemann surface Uan
S . One the other hand, the ﬁrst de Rham cohomology module
of the ﬁbers of E → S forms a rank two vector bundle
H1
DR(E/S, OE)
on Uan
S . This de Rham cohomology admits a Hodge ﬁltration, which may be thought of as
a natural exact sequence:
0 → ωE → H1
DR(E/S, OE) → τE → 0
Moreover, this vector bundleH1
DR(E/S, OE)o nUan
S admits a connection∇DR — called the
Gauss-Manin connection — which allows one to diﬀerentiate sections of H1
DR(E/S, OE).
Using this connection ∇DR to diﬀerentiate the Hodge ﬁltration gives rise to a natural
morphism
ΘSlog/k → τ⊗2
E
(where ΘSlog/k is the dual to ΩSlog/k) which is dual to the Kodaira-Spencer morphismκE.
Thus,
Another way to think of our search for “ F1” or “a notion of absolute
diﬀerentiation” is as the search for an arithmetic analogue of the Gauss-
Manin connection ∇
DR on the de Rham cohomology H1
DR(E/S, OE).
This is the ﬁrst step towards raising our search for an arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer mor-
phism to a more abstract level.
Next, let us recall that the de Rham isomorphism deﬁnes a natural isomorphism
H1
DR(E/S, OE) ∼= H1
sing(E/S, Z) ⊗Z OUan
S
(in the complex analytic category) over Uan
S . Moreover, the sections of H1
DR(E/S, OE)
deﬁned (via this isomorphism) by sections of H1
sing(E/S, Z)a r ehorizontal for ∇DR.T h u s ,
we conclude that:
17

To construct the Gauss-Manin connection ∇DR, it is enough to know
the de Rham isomorphism between de Rham and singular cohomology.
The de Rham isomorphism is a special case of the general notion of a Comparison Iso-
morphism between de Rham and singular/´etale cohomology. In the last few decades, this
sort of Comparison Isomorphism has been constructed over p-adic bases, as well (cf., e.g.,
[Falt1,2], [Hyodo]). In the arithmetic case, we would like to construct some sort of analogue
of the Kodaira-Spencer morphism over S which also has natural integrality properties at
the archimedean places, as well (since we would like to use it conclude inequalities concern-
ing the height of the elliptic curveE
K). Put another way, we would like to construct some
sort of arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism in the context of Arakelov theory.T h u s ,i n
summary, the above discussion suggests that:
In order to construct this sort of arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism,
a natural approach is to attempt to construct some sort ofComparison
Isomorphism in the “Arakelov theater,” analogous to the well-
known complex and p-adic Comparison Isomorphisms between de Rham
and ´etale/singular cohomology.
The construction of such an Arakelov-theoretic Comparison Theorem is the main goal of
this paper. To a certain extent, this goal is achieved by Theorem A(cf. §1). For a detailed
explanation of the sense in which the Comparison Isomorphism of Theorem A is analogous
to the well-known complex and p-adic Comparison Isomorphisms, we refer to Chapter
IX. Unfortunately, however, for various technical reasons, the arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer
morphism that naturally arises from Theorem A is not well enough understood at the
time of writing to allow its application to a proof of Vojta’s Conjectures (for more on these
“technical reasons,” cf. §5.1 below; Chapter IX, Example 3.5, and the Remark following
Example 3.5). In the remainder of the present§3, we would like to explain in detail how we
were led to Theorem A as a global, Arakelov-theoretic analogue of the well-known “local
Comparison Isomorphisms.”
§3.2. A Function-Theoretic Comparison Isomorphism
In §3.1, we saw that one way to think about absolute diﬀerentiation or an abso-
lute/arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism is to regard such objects as natural conse-
quences of a “global Hodge theory,” or Comparison Isomorphism between the de Rham
and ´etale cohomologies of an elliptic curve. The question then arises:
Just what form should such a Global Comparison Isomorphism — i.e.,
in suggestive notation
H
1
DR(E) ⊗ ?? ∼= H1
et(E) ⊗ ??
— take?
18

For instance, over C, such a comparison isomorphism exists naturally over C, i.e., when
one takes ?? = C.I n t h ep-adic case, one must introduce rings of p-adic periods such as
BDR, Bcrys (cf., e.g., [Falt2]) in order to obtain such an isomorphism. Thus, we would like
to know over if there is some sort of natural “ring of global periods” over which we may
expect to obtain our global comparison isomorphism.
In fact, in the comparison isomorphism obtained in this paper (cf. §1, Theorem A),
unlike the situation over complex and p-adic bases, we do not work over some “global
ring of periods.” Instead, the situation is somewhat more complicated. Roughly speaking,
what we end up doing is the following:
In the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism, we obtain a compar-
ison isomorphism between the de Rham and ´etale cohomologies of an
elliptic curve by considering functions on the de Rham and ´ etale co-
homologies of the elliptic curve and then constructing an isomorphism
between the two resulting function spaces which is (essentially) an
isometry with respect to natural metrics on these function spaces at all
the primes of the base.
Indeed, for instance over a number ﬁeld, the de Rham cohomology and ´etale cohomology are
ﬁnite modules over very diﬀerent sorts of rings (i.e., the ring of integers of the number ﬁeld
in the de Rham case; the proﬁnite completion ofZ, or one of its quotients in the ´etale case),
and it is diﬃcult to imagine the existence of a natural “global arithmetic ring” containing
both of these two types of rings. (Note here that unlike the case with Shimura varieties,
the ad`eles are not a natural choice here for a number of reasons. Indeed, to consider the
ad`eles here roughly amounts to simply forming the direct product of the various local (i.e.,
complex and p-adic) comparison isomorphisms, which is not very interesting in the sense
that such a simple direct product does not result in any naturalglobal structures.) Thus:
The idea here is to abandon the hope of obtaining a global linear iso-
morphism between the de Rham and ´etale cohomology modules,a n d
instead to look for an isomorphism (as mentioned above) between the
corresponding function spaces which does not necessarily arise from a
linear morphism between modules.
In the present §, we explain how we were led to look for such a “function-theoretic com-
parison isomorphism,” while in§3.3 below, we examine the meaning of the nonlinearity of
this sort of comparison isomorphism.
In order to understand the motivating circumstances that naturally lead to the in-
troduction of this sort of function-theoretic point of view, we must ﬁrst return to the
discussion of the case over the complexes in §3.1 above. Thus, in the following discussion,
we use the notation of the discussion of the complex case in §3.1. One more indirect way
to think about the existence of the Kodaira-Spencer morphism is the following. Recall the
exact sequence
19

0 → ωE → H1
DR(E/S, OE) → τE → 0
which in fact exists naturally over San. The Gauss-Manin connection ∇DR acts on the
middle term of this exact sequence (as a connection with logarithmic poles at the points
of bad reduction), but does not preserve the image of ω
E. One important consequence of
this fact is that:
(If one imposes certain “natural logarithmic conditions” on the splitting
at points of bad reduction, then) this exact sequence does not split.
Indeed, if this exact sequence split, then one could use this splitting to obtain aconnection
on ωE induced by ∇DR. Moreover, if the “natural logarithmic conditions” are satisﬁed,
it would follow that this connection on ωE has zero monodromy at the points of bad
reduction, i.e., that the connection is regular over all ofSan. But since ωE is the pull-back
to S of an ample line bundle on ( M1,0)Z, it follows (so long as E → S is not isotrivial)
that deg(ωE) ̸= 0, hence that the line bundle ωE cannot admit an everywhere regular
connection. That is, we obtain a contradiction.
Another (essentially equivalent) way to think about the relationship between the fact
that the above exact sequence does not split and the existence of the Kodaira-Spencer
morphism is the following. If one considers the ω
⊗2
E -torsor of splittings of the above
exact sequence (together with the “natural logarithmic conditions” at the points of bad
reduction), we obtain a class
η ∈ H
1
c (S, ω⊗2
E )
where the subscript “c” stands for “cohomology with compact support.” (The reason that
we get a class with compact support is because of the “natural logarithmic conditions” at
the points of bad reduction.) On the other hand, if we apply the functor H
1
c (−)t ot h e
Kodaira-Spencer morphism, we obtain a morphism
H1
c (S, ω⊗2
E ) → H1
c (S,ΩSlog/k)= H1
c (S,ΩS/k) ∼= k
Moreover, the image of η under this morphism can easily be shown to be the element of
H1
c (S,ΩS/k) ∼= k which is the degree of the classifying morphism α : S → (M1,0)C, i.e.,
deg(α) ∈ Z ⊆ C = k, which is nonzero (so long as E → S is not isotrivial). This implies
that η is nonzero.
Thus, in summary,
An indirect way to “witness the existence of the Kodaira-Spencer mor-
phism” is to observe that the above exact sequence does not split, i.e.,
that the ω
⊗2
E -torsor of splittings of this sequence is nontrivial.
20

This point of view is discussed in more detail in [Mzk2], Introduction, §2.3. Also, we
observe that this nonsplitting of the above exact sequence may also be regarded as a sort
of “stability of the (vector bundle plus connection) pair” ( H
1
DR(E/S, OE), ∇DR). This
type of stability of a bundle equipped with connection is referred to as “crys-stability” in
[Mzk2] — cf. [Mzk2], Introduction, §1.3; [Mzk2], Chapter I, for more details.
Fig. 1: The split case.
Now let us return to the arithmetic case. In this case, S =S p e c (OK)( w h e r eOK is
the ring of integers of a number ﬁeld K). Moreover, we have a natural exact sequence of
OK-modules:
0 → ωE → H1
DR(E/S, OE) → τE → 0
which extends naturally to an exact sequence of OK-modules with Hermitian metrics at
the inﬁnite primes , i.e., an exact sequence of arithmetic vector bundles on S (where S
denotes the formal union ofS with the set of inﬁnite primes of K) in the sense of Arakelov
theory. Then one can consider whether or not this exact sequence of arithmetic vector
bundles splits. Moreover, just as in the complex case, one can think of this issue as the
21

issue of whether or not a certain Arakelov-theoretic ω⊗2
E -torsor splits. (The notion and
basic properties of torsors in Arakelov-theory are discussed in Chapter I.) Thus,
One way to regard the issue of constructing an arithmetic Kodaira-
Spencer morphism is as the issue of constructing a theory that proves
that/explains why this Arakelov-theoretic ω
⊗2
E -torsor does not split.
Indeed, the nonsplitting of this torsor is very closely related to the Conjectures of Vojta
and Szpiro — in fact, the existence of (for instance, an inﬁnite number of) counterexamples
to these conjectures would imply (in an inﬁnite number of cases) the splitting of this torsor
(cf. Chapter I, Theorem 2.4; Chapter I, §4).
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Fig. 2: The non-split case.
From a more elementary point of view, the nonsplitting of this torsor may be thought
of in the following fashion. First of all, an arithmetic vector bundle overS may be thought
of as an ( OK-) lattice in a real or complex vector space. Thus, for instance, in the case
K = Q, one may think of H1
DR(E/S, OE) as a lattice in R2, while the arithmetic line
bundles ωE and τE may be thought of as lattices in R. In the case of arithmetic line
bundles, to say that the degree of the arithmetic line bundle (cf. Chapter I, §1) is large
22

(respectively, small) amounts to saying that the points of the lattice are rather densely
(respectively, sparsely) distributed. Note that since ωE is the pull-back to S of an ample
line bundle (M1,0)Z, its degree tends to be rather large. Thus, to say that the torsor in
question splits is to say that H1
DR(E/S, OE) looks rather like the lattice of Fig. 1, i.e., it
is dense in one direction and sparse in another (roughly orthogonal) direction. We would
like to show that H
1
DR(E/S, OE) looks more like the lattice in Fig. 2, i.e.:
We would like to show that the lattice corresponding toH1
DR(E/S, OE)
is roughly equidistributed in all directions.
Since we are thinking about comparison isomorphisms, it is thus tempting to think of the
comparison isomorphism as something which guarantees that the “distribution of matter”
in the lattice H1
DR(E/S, OE) is as even in all directions as the “distribution of matter” in
the ´etale cohomology ofE. Also, it is natural to think of the “distribution of matter issues”
involving the ´etale cohomology, or torsion points, of E as being related to the action of
Galois. (The action of Galois on the torsion points is discussed in Chapter II.) Thus, in
summary:
It is natural to expect that the global comparison isomorphism should
be some sort of equivalence between “distributions of matter” in the de
Rham and ´etale cohomologies of an elliptic curve.
Typically, in analytic number theory, probability theory, and other ﬁeld of mathematics
where “distributions of matter” must be measured precisely, it is customary to measure
them by thinking about functions — i.e., so-called “test functions” — (and the resulting
function spaces) on the spaces where these distributions of matter occur. It is for this
reason that the author was led to the conclusion that:
The proper formulation for a global comparison isomorphism should be
some sort of isometric (for metrics at all the primes of a number ﬁeld)
isomorphism between spaces of functions on the de Rham and ´etale co-
homologies of an elliptic curve.
This is precisely what is obtained in Theorem A.
§3.3. The Meaning of Nonlinearity
In §3.2 above, we saw that one of the central ideas of this paper is that to obtain
a “global Hodge theory,” one must sacriﬁce linearity = additivity , and instead look for
isometric isomorphisms between spaces of functions on the de Rham and ´etale cohomology.
Put another way, this approach amounts to abandoning the idea that the de Rham and
´etale cohomologies are modules, and instead thinking of them as (nonlinear) geometric
objects. Thus, one appropriate name for this approach might be“geometric motive theory.”
23

This approach contrasts sharply with typical approaches to the “theory of motives” or to
“global Hodge theories” which tend torevolve around additivity/linearization, and involve
such “linear” techniques as the introduction of derived categories that contain motives. In
some sense, since we set out to develop a global Hodge theory in the context of Arakelov
theory, the nonlinearity of the Comparison Isomorphism of Theorem A is perhaps not
so surprising: Indeed, many objects in Arakelov theory which are analogues of “linear”
objects in usual scheme theory become “nonlinear” when treated in the context of Arakelov
theory. Perhaps the most basic example of this phenomenon is the fact that in Arakelov
theory, the space of global sections of an arithmetic line bundle is not closed under addition.
This makes it diﬃcult and unnatural (if not impossible) to do homological algebra (e.g.,
involving derived categories) in the context of Arakelov theory.
Another way to think about the nonlinearity of the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Iso-
morphism is that it is natural considering that the fundamental algebraic object that
encodes the “symmetries of the Gaussian,” namely, the Heisenberg algebra — i.e., the Lie
algebra generated by 1, x, y, and the relations [ x, y] = 1, [ x,1] = [ y, 1] = 0 (the ´etale
counterpart of which is the theta groups of Mumford) — is closely related to nonlinear
geometries. In the ﬁeld of noncommutative geometry, the object that represents these
symmetries is known as the noncommutative torus. Since the Gaussian and its derivatives
lie at the technical heart at the theory of this paper, it is thus not surprising that the
nonabelian nature of the symmetries of the Gaussian should manifest itself in the theory.
In fact, in the portion of the theory of this paper at archimedean primes, it turns out that
the Comparison Isomorphism in some sense amounts to a function-theoretic splitting of
the exact sequence 0 → d · Z → Z → Z/d · Z → 0, i.e., a function-theoretic version of a
bijection
(Z/d · Z) × (d · Z) ∼= Z
This sort of splitting is somewhat reminiscent of the “splitting” inherent in regardingZ as
being some sort of “polynomial algebra over F
1.” Moreover, this archimedean portion of
the theory is also (not surprisingly) closely related to the derivatives of the Gaussian and
the symmetries encoded in the Heisenberg algebra. Thus, in summary:
It is as if the symmetries/twist inherent in the inclusion “ F
1 ⊆ Z”a r e
precisely the symmetries/twist encoded in the noncommutative torus (of
noncommutative geometry).
We refer to the discussion of Chapter VIII, §0, for more details on this point of view.
§3.4. Hodge Theory at Finite Resolution
So far, we have discussed the idea that the appropriate way to think about Comparison
Isomorphisms is to regard them as (isometric) isomorphisms between spaces of functions
24

on the de Rham and ´etale cohomologies of an elliptic curve. The question then arises:
How does one deﬁne such a natural isomorphism? The key idea here is the following:
Comparison Isomorphisms should be deﬁned asevaluation maps, given
by evaluating functions on the universal extension of an elliptic curve —
which is a sort of “ H
1
DR(E, O×
E ),” i.e., a kind of de Rham cohomology
of the elliptic curve — at the torsion points of the universal extension
(which may naturally be identiﬁed with the ´etale cohomology of the el-
liptic curve).
In fact, one of the main observations that led to the development of the theory of this
paper is the following:
The classical Comparison Isomorphisms over complex and p-adic bases
may be formulated precisely as evaluation maps of certain functions on
the universal extension at the torsion points (or the “singular cohomol-
ogy analogue of torsion points”) of the universal extension.
This key observation is discussed in detail in Chapter IX, §1, 2. In the complex case, it
amounts to an essentially trivial reformulation of the classical theory. Perhaps the best way
to summarize this reformulation is to state that thesubspace of functionson the “singular
cohomology analogue of torsion points” arising from the theta functions on the elliptic
curve is itself a sort of “function-theoretic” representation of the Hodge ﬁltration induced
(by the de Rham isomorphism) on the singular cohomology with complex coeﬃcients
of an elliptic curve. In fact, this observation more than any other played an essential
role in convincing the author that (roughly speaking) “theta functions naturally deﬁne
the Comparison Isomorphism” (hence that any global Comparison Isomorphism should
involve theta functions). In the p-adic case, this “key observation” amounts to what is
usually referred to as the p-adic period map (cf., e.g., [Coln], [Colz1,2], [Font], [Wint]; the
beginning of Chapter IX, §2, of the present paper) of elliptic curves (or abelian varieties).
Thus, in summary, the complex, p-adic, and Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomor-
phisms may all be formulated along very similar lines, i.e., as evaluation maps of functions
on the universal extension at the torsion points of the universal extension. Of course, the
diﬀerence between the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism and its local (i.e., com-
plex and p-adic) counterparts is that unlike in the local case, where the spaces of torsion
points involved are “completed at some prime,” in the Hodge-Arakelov case, we work with
a discrete set of torsion points . It is for this reason that we ﬁnd it natural to think of
the theory of the present paper as a “discretization” of the well-known local comparison
isomorphisms. Another way that one might think of the theory of the present paper is as
a “Hodge theory at ﬁnite resolution”(where we use the term “resolution” as in discussions
of the number of “pixels” (i.e., “picture elements, dots”) of a computer screen).
At this point, the reader might feel motivated to pose the following question:
25

If the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism is indeed a comparison
isomorphism analogous to the complex and p-adic comparison isomor-
phisms, then what sorts of “global periods” does it give rise to?
For instance, in the case of the complex comparison isomorphism, the most basic period
is the period of the Tate motive, i.e., of H1 of Gm, namely, 2πi.I n t h ep-adic case, the
corresponding period is the copy of Zp(1) that sits naturally inside Bcrys. The analogous
“period” resulting from the theory of the present paper, then, is the following: LetU be the
standard multiplicative coordinate onGm.T h e nU − 1 forms a section of some ample line
bundle on Gm, hence may be thought of as a sort of “theta function” (cf. especially, the
Schottky uniformization of an elliptic curve, as in [Mumf4], §5). Then, roughly speaking,
the “discretized Hodge theory” of the present paper amounts essentially—f r o mt h ep o i n t
of view of periods — to thinking of the period “2πi”a s
lim
n→∞
n · (U − 1)|U=exp(2πi/n)
i.e., the evaluation of a theta function at an n-torsion point, for some large n. For the
elliptic curve analogue (at archimedean primes) of this representation of 2πi, we refer
especially to Chapter VII, §5, 6, of the present paper.
In fact, another way to interpret the theory of the present paper is the following.
First, let us observe that the classical complex comparison isomorphism (i.e., the de Rham
isomorphism) is centered around “diﬀerentiation” and “integration,” i.e., calculus on the
elliptic curve. Moreover, in some sense, the most fundamental aspect of calculus as opposed
to algebraic geometry on the elliptic curve is the use of real analytic functions on the
elliptic curve. In the present context, however, we wish to keep everything “arithmetic”
and “global” over a number ﬁeld. Thus, instead of performing calculus on the underlying
real analytic manifold of a (complex) elliptic curve, we approximate this classical sort of
calculus by performing calculus on a ﬁnite (but “large”) set of torsion pointsof the elliptic
curve. That is to say:
We regard the set of torsion points as anapproximation of the under-
lying real analytic manifold of an elliptic curve.
Indeed, this notion of “discrete torsion calculus” is one of the key ideas of this paper.
For instance, the universal extension of a complex elliptic curve has acanonical real analytic
splitting (cf. Chapter III, Deﬁnition 3.2), which is fundamental to the Hodge theory of the
elliptic curve (cf., e.g., [Mzk2], Introduction, §0.7, 0.8). Since this splitting passes through
the torsion points of the universal extension (and, in fact, is equal to the closure of these
torsion points in the complex topology), it is thus natural to regard the torsion points
of the universal extension as a “discrete torsion calculus approximation” to the canonical
real analytic splitting (cf. Remark 1 following Chapter III, Deﬁnition 3.2). This “discrete
torsion calculus” point of view may also be seen in the use of the operator “δ” in Chapter
III, §6,7 (cf. also Chapter V, §4), as well as in the discussion of the “discrete Tchebycheﬀ
polynomials” in Chapter VII, §3.
26

§3.5. Relationship to Ordinary Frobenius Liftings and Anabelian Varieties
Finally, before proceeding, we present one more approach to thinking about “absolute
diﬀerentiation over F1.” Perhaps the most naive approach to deﬁning the derivative of a
number n ∈ Z (cf. [Ihara]) is to ﬁx a prime number p, and then to compare n with its
Teichm¨uller representative [n]p ∈ Zp. The idea here is that Teichm¨uller representatives
should somehow represent something analogous to a “ﬁeld of constants” inside Zp.T h u s ,
we obtain a correspondence
p ↦→ 1
p(n − [n]p)
Unfortunately, if one starts from this naive point of view, it seems to be very diﬃcult to
prove interesting global results concerning this correspondence, much less to apply it to
proving interesting results in diophantine geometry.
Thus, it is natural to attempt to recast this naive approach in a form that is more
amenable to globalization. To do this, let us ﬁrst note that to consider Teichm¨uller repre-
sentatives is very closely related to considering the natural Frobenius morphism
Φ
A : A → A
on the ring of Witt vectors A
def
= W(Fp). In fact, the Teichm¨uller representatives in A are
precisely the elements which satisfy the equation:
ΦA(a)= ap
Put another way, ifa is aunit, then it may be thought of as an element∈ Gm(A). Moreover,
Gm is equipped with its own natural Frobenius action ΦGm ,g i v e nb yU ↦→ Up (where U
is the standard multiplicative coordinate on Gm). Thus, the Teichm¨uller representatives
are given by those elements of a ∈ Gm(A) such that
ΦA(a)=Φ Gm (a)
In fact, this sort of situation where one has a natural Frobenius action on a p-adic (for-
mal) scheme, and one considers natural p-adic liftings of points on this scheme modulo
p which are characterized by the property that they are taken to their Frobenius (i.e.,
ΦA) conjugates by the given action of Frobenius occurs elsewhere in arithmetic geometry.
Perhaps the most well-known example of this situation (afterGm)i s the Serre-Tate theory
of liftings of ordinary abelian varieties. Recently, this theory has been generalized to the
case of moduli of hyperbolic curves ([Mzk1,2]). We refer to the Introductions of [Mzk1,2]
for more on this phenomenon. In the theory of [Mzk1,2], this sort of natural Frobenius
action on a p-adic (formal) scheme is referred to as an ordinary Frobenius lifting.
27

The theory of ordinary Frobenius liftings is itself a special (and, in some sense, the
simplest) case of p-adic Hodge theory. Thus, in summary, from this point of view, the
naive approach discussed above (involving the correspondence p ↦→ 1
p (n − [n]p)) may be
thought of as the approach given by “looking at the p-adic Hodge theory of Gm at each
prime p.” In particular, the relationship between the approach of this paper and the above
naive approach may be thought of as the diﬀerence betweendiscretizing the various local
p-adic Hodge theories into a global Arakelov-theoretic theory (as discussed in §3.1 – 3.4
above) and looking at the full completed p-adic Hodge theories individually.
In fact, there is another important diﬀerence between the approach of this paper
and the above naive approach — namely, the diﬀerence betweenGm and M
log
1,0 (the log
moduli stack of elliptic curves). That is to say, unlike the example discussed above, which
is essentially concerned with rational points of G
m, the theory of this paper concerns
“absolute diﬀerentiation for points of M
log
1,0.” At the present time, the author does not
know of an analogous approach to “globally discretizing” the local Hodge theories of Gm
(i.e., of doing forGm what is done forM
log
1,0 in this paper). Also, it is interesting to observe
that, unlike many theories for elliptic curves which generalize in a fairly straightforward
manner to abelian varieties of higher dimension, it is not so clear how to generalize the
theory of this paper to higher-dimensional abelian varieties (cf. §5.2 below). Thus, it
is tempting to conjecture that perhaps the existence of the theory of the present paper
in the case of
M
log
1,0 is somehow related to the anabelian nature of M
log
1,0 (cf. [Mzk3],
[IN]). That is to say, one central feature of anabelian varieties is a certain “extraordinary
rigidity”exhibited by their p-adic Hodge theory (cf. [Groth]; the Introduction to [Mzk3]).
In particular, it is tempting to suspect that this sort of rigidity orcoherenceis what allows
one to discretize the various local Hodge theories into a coherent global theory. Another
interesting observation in this direction is that thetheta groups that play an essential role
in this paper are essentially the same as/intimately related to the quotient
π
1(E − pt.)/[π1(E − pt.),[π1(E − pt.),π1(E − pt.)]]
of the fundamental groupπ1(E − pt.) of an elliptic curve with one point removed (which is
itself an anabelian variety). This sort of quotient of the fundamental group plays a central
role in [Mzk3].
Finally, we remark that one point of view related to the discussion of the preceding
paragraph is the following: One fundamental obstacle to “diﬀerentiating an integer n ∈
Z (or Q-rational point of G
m)o v e rF1” is that the residue ﬁelds Fp at the diﬀerent
points of Spec( Z) diﬀer, thus making it diﬃcult to compare the value of n at distinct
points of Spec(Z). On the other hand, the theory of the present paper — which involves
diﬀerentiatingZ-valued points of the moduli stack of log elliptic curvesM
log
1,0 — gets around
this problem eﬀectively by taking the set of d-torsion points as one’s absolute constants
that do not vary even as the residue ﬁeld varies. Note that relative to the discussion of
§3.4, this set of torsion points should be regarded as a discrete analogue/approximation to
the underlying real analytic manifold (which, of course, remains constant) of a family of
complex elliptic curves.
28

§4. Guide to the Text
In this §, we give brief summaries of the contents of the various chapters of this paper.
In Chapter I, we discuss the notion of a “torsor” in Arakelov theory, give various
criteria for when such torsors split, and ﬁnally, explain how such torsors arise naturally
in arithmetic geometry. In Chapter II, we consider the issue of the extent to which the
Galois action on the torsion pointsof an elliptic curve over a number ﬁeld is transitive. We
remark that neither of these two chapters is logically necessary for the proof of the main
results of this paper. (Thus, the reader who is only interested in the proof of Theorem A (of
§1), for instance, may skip these two chapters.) The reason for the inclusion of these two
chapters is that they help to clarify the background of the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison
Isomorphism, as explained in the discussion of §3.2 above.
The bulk of the remainder of the text is devoted to the proof of the Hodge-Arakelov
Comparison Isomorphism. In Chapter III, we review basic facts concerning the universal
extension of an elliptic curve, and especially its relation to the Schottky uniformization of
an elliptic curve. In Chapter IV, we review Mumford’s theory of algebraic theta functions
([Mumf1,2,3]) and Zhang’s theory ofmetrized line bundles ([Zh]) and derive various conse-
quences of these theories as they relate to the theory of the present paper. In Chapter V,
we construct theevaluation map that gives rise to the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomor-
phism and verify various basic properties of this evaluation map. Finally, in Chapter VI, we
prove the scheme-theoretic portion of the Comparison Isomorphism by means of (among
other things) a rather involved computation of degrees (cf. the discussion immediately
following the statement of Theorem A in §1).
The next two chapters (VII and VIII) are devoted to the theory of the Comparison
Isomorphism at archimedean primes. In Chapter VII, we discuss variousnatural systems of
orthogonal functions, which provide natural coordinate systems in the spaces of functions
that appear in the study of the Comparison Isomorphism. Many of these systems of
orthogonal functions are closely related to the well-known classical systems of Legendre
and Hermite. Finally, in Chapter VIII, we apply the theory of Chapter VII to complete
the proof of the archimedean portion of the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism.
In the ﬁnal chapter of the text, Chapter IX, we explain how the Hodge-Arakelov Com-
parison Isomorphism may be applied to construct anarithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism
for elliptic curves over number ﬁelds. We also explain how the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison
Isomorphism and the arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism derived from it are related to
more classical comparison isomorphisms and Kodaira-Spencer-type morphisms over com-
plex and p-adic bases.
29

§5. Future Directions
§5.1. Gaussian Poles and the Theta Convolution
In some sense, the most fundamental outstanding problem left unsolved in this paper
is the following:
How can one get rid of the Gaussian poles (cf. §1)?
For instance, if one could get rid of the Gaussian poles in Theorem A, there would be
substantial hope of applying Theorem A to Vojta’s Conjectures(cf. Chapter IX, Example
3.5, and the Remark following Example 3.5). For instance, if we take m =2 d in Theorem
A (so that the metrized line bundle L is symmetric), then one gets an action of {±1} on
the domain and range of the Comparison Isomorphism (which is itself compatible with this
action). If one then decomposes the domain without Gaussian poles into eigenspaces for
this action (and uses the fact that everything is compatible with the action of the theta
groups involved), then one obtains natural ω
⊗2j
E -torsors (where j ≥ 1 is an integer) that
split if and only if these eigenspaces of the domain split into direct sums of nonpositive
powers of ω
E. Thus, if one could somehow get the Galois (i.e., Π S) action resulting
from the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism to exist without the Gaussian poles,
then violations to Vojta’s Conjecture would result in a complete splitting of the domain
(without Gaussian poles) into nonpositive powers of ω
E. Since, moreover, this Galois
action is not likely to preserve the Hodge ﬁltration, one would then most likely obtain
morphisms from various powers of ω
E into strictly smaller powers of ωE, which would
result in a contradiction (since ωE tends to have positive degree).
The above sketch of an argument (i.e., that one might be able to apply Theorem
A to Vojta’s Conjectures if only one could get rid of the Gaussian poles) provides, in
the opinion of the author, strong motivation for investigating the issue of whether or not
one can somehow eliminate the Gaussian poles from Theorem A. Moreover, the following
argument indicates how this might be done: As discussed in §2, in some sense, one may
regard the theory of this paper as the theory of the Gaussian and its derivatives .T h e
classical example of the theory of the Gaussian and its derivatives is the theory ofHermite
functions. The Hermite functions, which are various derivatives of the Gaussian, are not
themselves polynomials, but rather of the form: (polynomial) · (Gaussian). Thus, it is
natural to divide the Hermite functions by the Gaussian, which then gives us polynomials
which are called theHermite polynomials. In the theory of this paper, the original Gaussian
corresponds (relative to taking the Fourier expansion) to the algebraic theta functions of
Mumford (i.e., before we consider derivatives); the “unwanted” Gaussian that remains in
the Hermite functions corresponds to the Gaussian poles. Moreover, since multiplication
and division after taking the Fourier expansion correspond to convolution, it is natural
to imagine that the image of the “domain without Gaussian poles” of the Comparison
Isomorphism (of Theorem A) should correspond to those functions on the torsion points
30

that are in the image of (the morphism given by) convolution with the (original) theta
function — which we refer to as the “theta convolution” for short. Thus, it is natural to
conjecture that:
By studying the theta convolution, one might be able to construct a Ga-
lois action like the one needed in the argument above, i.e., a “Galois
action without Gaussian poles.”
In [STC], we study this theta convolution, and obtain, in particular, a theta-convoluted
comparison isomorphism, which has the property that, in a neighborhood of the divisor
at inﬁnity, when one works with an ´etale (i.e., isomorphic to Z/dZ) Lagrangian subgroup,
and a multiplicative (i.e., isomorphic to μ
d) restriction subgroup, then the Gaussian poles
vanish, as desired (cf. [STC], especially Remark 1 following Theorem 10.1, for more de-
tails). In fact, this point of view is already implicit in the present paper in the theory of
the metrics “ || ∼ ||
w,μa ” of Chapter VIII, §1,2. Even in the case of the theta-convoluted
comparison isomorphism, however, the Gaussian poles fail to vanish (in a neighborhood
of the divisor at inﬁnity) if either the restriction subgroup fails to be multiplicative or the
Lagrangian subgroup fails to be ´etale.
In these cases, it is tempting to suspect that (at least at p-adic primes) perhaps by
working over some sort of base like “B
crys”—o v e rw h i c hμd and Z/d · Z become isomor-
phic — these technical problems involving ´etale restriction subgroups and multiplicative
Lagrangian subgroups may be overcome. In fact, this point of view is already implicit
in the discussion of Chapter IX, §2, of the present paper. It is the hope of the author
to discuss these issues in a sequel to the present paper and [STC] devoted to the p-adic
aspects of the theta convolution (cf. the Introduction to [STC]).
§5.2. Higher Dimensional Abelian Varieties and Hyperbolic Curves
Once results such as Theorem A (of §1) have been established for elliptic curves, it is
natural to attempt to generalize such results to higher dimensional abelian varieties and
hyperbolic curves. Unfortunately, however, even in the case of the abelian varieties, where
one expects the generalization to be relatively straightforward, one immediately runs into
a number of problems. For instance, if one considers sections of an ample line bundle L
over the universal extension of an abelian variety of dimension g, the dimension over the
base ﬁeld of the space of global sections of torsorial degree <d is:
(d − 1+ g
g
)
· d
g <d 2g
(where we assume that the dimension of the space of global sections of L over the abelian
variety itself is equal to dg)i f g> 1. Thus, the naive generalization of Theorem A simple
cannot possibly hold (i.e., since the two spaces between which one must construct an
isomorphism have diﬀerent dimensions). Nevertheless, it is the hope of the author that
31

someday this sort of technical problem may be overcome, and that the theory of this paper
may be generalized to arbitrary abelian varieties. If such a generalization could be realized,
it would be interesting if, for instance, just as the various models (Hermite, Legendre,
Binomial) that occur in the archimedean theory of the present paper correspond naturally
to the possible slopes of the action of Frobenius (on the ﬁrst crystalline cohomology module
of an elliptic curve) at ﬁnite primes (cf. the discussion of this phenomenon in §1), it were
the case that the corresponding models in the archimedean theory for arbitrary abelian
varieties correspond to the possibleNewton polygonsof the action of Frobenius (on the ﬁrst
crystalline cohomology module of an abelian variety of the dimension under consideration)
at ﬁnite primes.
Another natural direction in which to attempt to generalize the theory of this paper
would be to extend it to a global/Arakelov-theoretic Hodge theory of hyperbolic curves.
Indeed, the “complex Hodge theory of hyperbolic curves,” which revolves around the K¨obe
uniformization of (the Riemann surfaces corresponding to) such curves by the upper half-
plane, has already been extended to the p-adic case ([Mzk1,2]). Moreover, the theory of
[Mzk1,2] may also be regarded as the “hyperbolic curve analogue” of Serre-Tate theory.
Thus, it is natural to attempt to construct a “global Arakelov version” of [Mzk1,2], just as
the theory of the present paper in some sense constitutes a globalization of the Serre-Tate
theory/p-adic Hodge theory of elliptic curves (cf. Chapter IX, §2).
Bibliography
[Coln] R. Coleman, Hodge-Tate periods and p-adic Abelian integrals, Inv. Math. 78 (1984),
pp. 351-379.
[Colz1] P. Colmez, P´eriodes p-adiques des vari´et´es ab´eliennes, Math. Ann. 292 (1992), pp.
629-644.
[Colz2] P. Colmez, Int´egration sur les vari´et´es p-adiques, Ast´erisque 248, Soc. Math. de France
(1998).
[Falt1] G. Faltings, p-adic Hodge Theory, Journal of the Amer. Math. Soc. 1, No. 1 (1988),
pp. 255-299.
[Falt2] G. Faltings, Crystalline Cohomology and p-adic Galois Representations, Proceedings
of the First JAMI Conference, Johns-Hopkins University Press (1990), pp. 25-79.
[FC] G. Faltings and C.-L. Chai,Degenerations of Abelian Varieties, Springer-Verlag (1990).
[Font] J. M. Fontaine, Formes diﬀerentielles et modules de Tate des vari´et´es ab´eliennes sur
les corps locaux, Inv. Math. 65 (1982), pp. 379-409.
[GGA] L. Schneps and P. Lochak, Geometric Galois Actions: 1. Around Grothendieck’s Es-
quisse d’un Programme, 2. The Inverse Galois Problem, Moduli Spaces and Mapping
Class Groups, London Math. Soc. Lect. Note Ser. 242-243, Cambridge Univ. Press
(1997).
32

[Groth] A.Grothendieck, Letter to G.Faltings, June 1983, in [GGA], Vol. 1, pp. 49-58.
[Hyodo] O. Hyodo, On variation of Hodge-Tate structures, Math. Ann. 284 (1989), pp. 7-22.
[Ihara] Y. Ihara, Fermat-shou to “Kazu no Bibun” ni tsuite (= “On Fermat Quotients and
‘Derivatives of Numbers’ ” — in Japanese) inAlgebraic Analysis and Number Theory,
RIMS Kokyuroku 810 (1992).
[IN] Y.Ihara and H. Nakamura, Some illustrative examples for anabelian geometry in high
dimensions, in [GGA], Vol.1, pp. 127-138.
[Kato] K. Kato, Logarithmic Structures of Fontaine-Illusie, Proceedings of the First JAMI
Conference, Johns Hopkins University Press (1990), 191-224.
[Katz1] N. Katz, The Eisenstein Measure andp-adic Interpolation, Amer. Journ. of Math.99,
No. 2 (1977), pp. 238-311.
[Katz2] N. Katz, Serre-Tate Local Moduli,Algebraic Surfaces (Orsay, 1976-78), Lecture Notes
in Mathematics 868, Springer-Verlag (1981), pp. 138-202.
[KM] N. Katz and B. Mazur, Arithmetic Moduli of Elliptic Curves, Annals of Mathematics
Studies 108, Princeton University Press (1985).
[Lang] S. Lang, Introduction to Arakelov Theory, Springer-Verlag (1988), Appendix by Vojta.
[Mumf1,2,3] D. Mumford, On the equations deﬁning abelian varieties I, II, III, Invent. Math. 1
(1966), pp. 287-354; 2 (1967), pp. 71-135; 3 (1967), pp. 215-244.
[Mumf4] D. Mumford, An Analytic Construction of Degenerating Abelian Varieties over Com-
plete Rings, Appendix to [FC].
[Mzk1] S. Mochizuki, A Theory of Ordinary p-adic Curves, Publ. of RIMS 32 (1996), pp.
957-1151.
[Mzk2] S. Mochizuki, Foundations of p-adic Teichm¨uller Theory, AMS/IP Studies in Ad-
vanced Mathematics 11, American Mathematical Society/International Press (1999).
[Mzk3] S. Mochizuki, The Local Pro- p Anabelian Geometry of Curves, to appear in Invent.
Math.
[STC] S. Mochizuki, The Scheme-Theoretic Theta Convolution, manuscript.
[Vojta] P. Vojta, Diophantine Approximations and Value Distribution Theory, Lecture Notes
in Mathematics 1239, Springer-Verlag (1987).
[Wint] J.-P. Wintenberger, Th´eor`eme de comparaison p-adique pour les sch´emas ab´eliens. I:
Construction de l’accouplement de p´eriodes, P´eriodes p-Adiques, Ast´erisque 223,S o c .
Math. de France (1994).
[Zh] S. Zhang, Admissible pairing on a curve, Invent. Math. 112 (1993), pp. 171-193.
33

Chapter I: Torsors in Arakelov Theory
§0. Introduction
In this Chapter, after reviewing various well-known facts from Arakelov theory, we
discuss the notion of atorsor in the Arakelov context and prove various results (Theorems
2.4, 3.2; Corollary 2.5) concerning the existence of splittings of such torsors. Finally, in§4,
we discuss how such torsors arise naturally in arithmetic geometry, and, more speciﬁcally,
how they relate to the main goal of this paper, which is to understand the structure of the
arithmetic torsor deﬁned by the universal extension of an elliptic curve .
§1. Arakelov Theory in Geometric Dimension Zero
In this §, we review basic facts concerning Arakelov theory in the case of geometric di-
mension zero. Our references will be [GS] and [Szp]. Arakelov theory provides a convenient
language for expressing many well-known results in elementary number theory.
We begin by introducing notation. Let K be a number ﬁeld , i.e., a ﬁnite extension
of Q.L e t O
K be its ring of integers. Let d
def
=[ K : Q] (i.e., the degree of K over Q).
Let r1 (respectively, r2) be the number of real (respectively, complex) places of K (so
d = r1 +2 r2). Let Σ be the set of embeddings K↪ → C.I f σ ∈ Σ, we write σ for the
embedding obtained by composing σ with complex conjugation. Also, if σ ∈ Σ, we shall
write ϵσ for [Kσ : R]. Let DK ∈ Z>0 be the absolute value of the discriminant of K over
Q.
Deﬁnition 1.1. We shall call (cf. [GS], §2.4.1) a pair M =( M,h )a n arithmetic vector
bundle over K (of rankr) if M if a ﬁnite, ﬂat OK-module (such that dimK(M ⊗OK K)= r),
and h = {hσ }σ∈Σ is a set of Hermitian metrics hσ on Mσ
def
= M ⊗OK Kσ such that the
metric hσ is the complex conjugate of the metrichσ. We shall refer to an arithmetic vector
bundle of rank one as an arithmetic line bundle.
Example 1.2. The OK-module OK equipped with the metrics given by the absolute
value || σ deﬁned by σ ∈ Σ deﬁnes a natural arithmetic line bundle. We shall denote this
arithmetic line bundle by OK.
Example 1.3. Consider the OK-module ωK
def
= Hom Z(OK,Z) (cf. [Szp], §1.3). Observe
that the trace deﬁnes a natural element Tr ∈ ωK. Moreover, there exists a unique metric
34

on (ωK)σ such that |Tr|σ = ϵσ. We shall denote the resulting arithmetic line bundle by
ωK.
Note that if L and M are arithmetic vector bundles, then one can form various new
arithmetic vector bundles as follows: L ⊗OK
M; HomOK
(M, L); M
∨ def
= Hom OK
(M, OK);
M
∗ def
= Hom OK
(M, ωK); (for i ∈ Z≥0) ∧i M. (Note that our notation diﬀers from that of
[GS].) All have naturally deﬁned metrics, which we leave to the reader to make explicit. If
L, M,a n dP are arithmetic line bundles, then we deﬁne an exact sequence of arithmetic
line bundles
0 → L → M → P → 0
to be an exact sequence of the underlyingOK-modules such that: at each σ,( i )t h em e t r i c
on Lσ is induced by restricting the metric of Mσ; (ii) the metric on Pσ is induced by the
metric on the orthogonal complement to Lσ in Mσ.
Let M be an arithmetic vector bundle . Then we would like to deﬁne a number of
invariants associated to M.L e tu sw r i t e
H0(M)
def
= {m ∈ M such that |m|σ ≤ 1 ∀σ ∈ Σ}
and
h0(M)
def
= log(#H0(M)) ∈ R
Next, we could like to deﬁne the degree deg( M)o f M. First of all, if M is an arithmetic
line bundle, then for any m ∈ M, we deﬁne (cf. [GS], §2.4.1)
deg(M)
def
= log(#(M/O· m)) −
∑
σ∈Σ
log(|m|σ) ∈ R
This real number is easily seen (by means of the product formula of elementary number
theory) to be independent of the choice of m ∈ M. Note that if M is an arithmetic line
bundle,a n dh0(M) > 0( s oH0(M) has at least one nonzero element), then it follows from
the deﬁnition of H 0(M)t h a td e g (M) ≥ 0.
More generally, for M of arbitrary rank r,w el e td e g (M)
def
=d e g (∧r M). If L is
an arithmetic line bundle, then deg(M ⊗ L)=d e g (M)+ r · deg(L). Moreover, deg( −)i s
additive on exact sequences. Finally, we would like to deﬁne theEuler characteristic χ(M)
of M:
χ(M)
def
=d e g (M)+ r · χ(OK)
35

where
χ(OK)
def
= r2 · log(2) − 1
2 log(DK)
(In [Szp], §1.3, a diﬀerent, but equivalent deﬁnition ofχ(−) is given in terms of logarithms
of volumes.) The invariant χ(−) is additive on exact sequences.
Proposition 1.4. We have: deg(ωK)= −2 · χ(OK)=l o g (DK) − 2r2 · log(2).
Proof. See [Szp], Lemma 1.4. ⃝
Next, we would like to review the main result (Theorem 2) of [GS].
Theorem 1.5. There exists a universal constant C ∈ R>0 which is independent of K
such that the following inequalities hold:
−C · (nd) · (log(nd)+1 ) ≤ h0(M) − h0(M
∗
) − χ(M) ≤ C · (nd) · (log(nd)+1 )
for any arithmetic vector bundle M of rank n> 0 over a number ﬁeld K.
Proof. This is essentially Theorem 2 of [GS]. It is easy to see (using the fact thatN! ≤ NN
and Stirling’s formula (see, e.g., [Ahlf], Chapter 5,§2.5 – cf. also Chapter VII, Lemma 1.5)
to estimate the size of the Γ function) that the number “ C(r1,r2,n)” of loc. cit. can be
bounded uniformly (with respect ton, M, K)b y C ·(nd) ·(log(nd)+1), for some universal
C ∈ R>0. ⃝
§2. Deﬁnition and First Properties of Torsors
Next, we would like to deﬁne the notion of an arithmetic torsor over an arithmetic
vector bundle. Thus, let M be an arithmetic vector bundle over K.
Deﬁnition 2.1. We shall call a pair T =( T,s )a n arithmetic torsor over M,o r ,s i m p l y ,
an M-torsor if T has the structure of an M-torsor T → Spec(OK)o nS p e c (OK), and
s = {sσ }σ∈Σ is a collection of rational points sσ ∈ T(Kσ) such that sσ is the complex
conjugate of sσ. We shall refer to the {sσ } as the approximands of the arithmetic torsor
T.
36

Let T be an M-torsor. Then we shall be especially interested in the issue of when T
“splits,” or “is trivial.”
Deﬁnition 2.2. We shall say thatT splits if there exists a t ∈ T(OK) such that for each
σ ∈ Σ, the element t − sσ ∈ Mσ satisﬁes |t − sσ |≤ 1. In this case, t will be called asplitting
of T,a n dw es h a l lw r i t et ∈ T(OK). If ϵ> 0a n d|t − sσ |≤ ϵ for all σ ∈ Σ, then we shall
call t a splitting of proximity ϵ,o r ,s i m p l y ,a nϵ-splitting.I f t − sσ =0f o ra l lσ ∈ Σ, then
we shall say that the torsor T is trivial.
Example 2.3. Suppose that 0 → M → P → OK → 0 is an exact sequence of arithmetic
vector bundles (over K). Then the splittings OK → P of this exact sequence form an M-
torsor T in a natural way: Indeed, if we forget about metrics, then the splittingsOK → P
form an M-torsor T → Spec(OK). Thus, it remains to deﬁne the “splittings at the inﬁnite
prime,” i.e., thesσ. We take sσ to be the splitting deﬁned by the orthogonal complement
to Mσ in Pσ. This gives us an M-torsor T. In fact, it is easy to show that every M-torsor
arises in this way. Moreover, T is trivial if and only if P ∼= M ⊕ OK.
Next, we would like to use Theorem 1.5 above to show that if L is a line bundle of
large degree, then every L-torsor splits.
Theorem 2.4. There exists a universal constant Cd ∈ R depending only on d =[ K : Q]
with the following property: Let L be an arithmetic line bundle over K such that the
inequality
deg(L) ≥ log(DK)+ Cd
is satisﬁed. Then any L-torsor T splits.
Proof. Let λ ∈ R>0.L e t u s w r i t eZ(λ) for the arithmetic line bundle over Q deﬁned
as follows: The underlying Z-module of Z(λ)i s Z, while the norm of 1 ∈ Z is given by
|1| = λ−1.T h u s ,i fλ is much greater than 1,Z(λ) will have lots of global sections (i.e., its
h0 will be large). Since the underlying Z-module of Z(λ)i s Z, one can regard H0(Z(λ))
as a (ﬁnite) subset of Z.L e tNλ be the product of all the positive elements of this subset.
Thus, Nλ ∈ Z, and every nonzero element of H0(Z(λ)) divides Nλ.
Next, let C be the universal constant of Theorem 1.5. LetC′
d
def
=2 C(d+1)(1+log( d+
1)) + 1∈ R.L e tλ be a real number > 1a n ds u c ht h a tl o g (λ) ≥ C′
d.L e tCd be a positive
real number such thatCd ≥ C′
d and Cd > log(Nλ). In the following, we would like to show
that this Cd has the property stated in the theorem.
Now let L be an arithmetic line bundle over K satisfying the inequality in the state-
ment of the theorem. Then we wish to deﬁne a new arithmetic line bundle Lλ over K as
37

follows: The underlying OK-module Lλ will be the OK-submodule Nλ ·L ⊆ L.T h em e t r i c
on (Lλ)σ = Lσ is deﬁned by taking λ times the metric on Lσ. Thus, we have an inclusion
φ : Lλ ↪→ L which is “globally integral” in the sense that the following two conditions are
satisﬁed: (i) α ∈ Lλ maps to an element ofL; (ii) α ∈ (Lλ)σ with absolute value ≤ 1 maps
to an element ofLσ with absolute value ≤ 1. It is then immediate from Deﬁnition 2.1 that
every L-torsor T arises from an Lλ-torsor Tλ by pushing forward via φ.
Now let us consider the L-torsor T arising (cf. Example 2.3) from an exact sequence
0 → L → M → OK → 0
By the remark at the end of the last paragraph, it follows that this exact sequence can
always be obtained by pushing forward (via φ) an exact sequence
0 → Lλ → Mλ → OK → 0
Next, let us “push-forward” this exact sequence via “Spec(OK) → Spec(Z)” so as to obtain
an exact sequence of arithmetic vector bundles over Q. Then, let us pull-back this exact
sequence via the morphism of Z-modules Z ↪→ OK given by the structure of OK as a
Z-algebra. This gives us an exact sequence
0 → L
′
λ → P
′
λ
→ Z → 0
Finally, let us tensor this exact sequence with Z(λ). This gives us an exact sequence
0 → L
′
λ(λ) → P
′
λ(λ) → Z(λ) → 0
We would like to use Theorem 1.5 to compute the number of global sections of the arith-
metic vector bundles in this exact sequence.
First, let us observe that
χ(L
′
λ(λ)) = −log(Nλ)+ χ(L)
= −log(Nλ)+d e g (L)+ χ(OK)
In particular, deg(L
′
λ(λ)) = −log(Nλ)+d e g (L). Thus,
deg(HomZ(L
′
λ(λ),Z)) = log(Nλ) − deg(L)+l o g (DK) − 2r2 · log(2)
≤ log(Nλ)+l o g (DK) − deg(L)
<C d + log(DK) − deg(L)
38

(where the last inequality follows from the fact that we chose Cd to be > log(Nλ)). It
thus follows that Hom Z(L
′
λ(λ),Z)) is an arithmetic line bundle over K whose degree is
negative. Thus, by [Szp], Lemma 1.1, this arithmetic line bundle has no global sections.
Similarly, since χ(Z(λ)) = deg(Z(λ)) = log(λ), we conclude that Hom Z(Z(λ),Z)h a sn o
global sections. It thus follows that HomZ(P
′
λ(λ),Z) also has no global sections.
Now we are ready to apply Theorem 1.5. We thus obtain that
h0(P
′
λ(λ)) ≥ χ(P
′
λ(λ)) − C(d +1 ) ( 1+l o g (d +1 ) )
> log(λ)+ χ(L
′
λ(λ)) − C′
d + C(d +1 ) ( 1+l o g (d +1 ) )
≥ (log(λ) − C′
d)+ χ(L
′
λ(λ)) +Cd(1 + log(d))
≥ h0(L
′
λ(λ))
Thus, there exists a sections ∈ H0(P
′
λ(λ)) whose images′ in Z(λ)i s nonzero.T h u s ,s′ ∈ Z
divides Nλ. Then, unraveling all of the complicated deﬁnitions reveals that if we divide the
section s by the integer s′, we obtain a section s′′ ∈ M whose image in OK is 1. Thus, it
remains to analyze s′′ at the inﬁnite primes. Let us denote (for σ ∈ Σ) by δσ (respectively,
δ′′
σ) the orthogonal projection of s (respectively, s′′)t o( L
′
λ(λ))σ (respectively, Lσ). Then
since s is “integral at σ,” it follows that
|δσ |2
σ ≤| δσ |2
σ + λ−2 · (s′)2 ≤ 1
On the other hand, |δ′′
σ |σ =( s′)−1 ·| δσ |σ. Thus, it follows immediately that |δ′′
σ |σ ≤ 1.
In other words, s′′ deﬁnes a splitting of the torsor T. This completes the proof of the
theorem. ⃝
Remark. Theorem 2.4 is the number-theoretic analogue of the following well-known fact
concerning line bundles on algebraic curves: If X is a smooth, geometrically connected,
proper curve over a ﬁeld k,a n dL is a line bundle onX such that deg(L) ≥ deg(ωX/k)+1,
then H1(X, L)=0 .
Corollary 2.5. There exists a universal constantCd ∈ R depending only on d =[ K : Q]
with the following property: Let E be an arithmetic vector bundle of rankr over a number
ﬁeld K which is equipped with a ﬁltration of arithmetic vector bundles
0= E0 ⊆ E1 ⊆ E2 ⊆ ... ⊆ Er−1 ⊆ Er = E
such that for all i =0 ,... ,r , the subquotients Li
def
= Ei/Ei−1 are arithmetic line bundles
which satisfy the inequality
39

deg(Li) ≥ log(DK)+ d · log(r)+ Cd
Then any E-torsor T splits.
Proof. Given an E-torsor, we may assume that the E-torsor arises (by push-forward)
from some torsor over E(r−1)
def
= E ⊗Z Z(r−1). By applying Theorem 2.4 to the push-
forward of this E(r−1)-torsor via the surjection E(r−1) → Lr(r−1) – where we note that
by assumption,
deg(Lr(r−1)) ≥ log(DK)+ CD
so it is alright to apply Theorem 2.4 to Lr(r−1) – we obtain a splitting of the resulting
Lr(r−1)-torsor. Thus, to split the E(r−1)-torsor in question, it remains to split a certain
Er−1(r−1)-torsor. Continuing in this fashion (i.e., pushing forward the Er−1(r−1)-torsor
via the surjection Er−1(r−1) → Lr−1(r−1), splitting the resulting Lr−1(r−1)-torsor by
Theorem 2.4, etc.) we see that relative to the E(r−1)-torsor in question, we obtain a
splitting sE of the underlying E(r−1)-torsor whose distance at an archimedean prime σ
from the approximand (cf. Deﬁnition 2.1) at σ is
≤ 1+1+...+1= r
(i.e., a total ofr “1”’s), where ther “1”’s arise from the distance from the approximands of
the torsors over L1(r−1),L2(r−1),... ,Lr(r−1) that we split in the process of constructing
sE. On the other hand, to say that sE has distance ≤ r from the approximands of the
E(r−1)-torsor in question means precisely (by the deﬁnition of the “( r−1)”) that if we
regard sE as a splitting of the original E-torsor, the distance of sE at an archimedean
place σ from the approximand (of the original E-torsor) at σ is ≤ 1, i.e., that sE deﬁnes
a splitting of the original E-torsor, as desired. ⃝
§3. Splittings with Bounded Denominators
Unfortunately, Theorem 2.4 is only useful when considering collections of torsors all
of which are deﬁned over number ﬁelds of bounded degree (over Q). Ideally, however,
we would like to be able to consider collections of torsors over various number ﬁelds of
arbitrarily large degree. In this case, we are not able to obtain as sharp a result as
Theorem 2.4, and instead must settle for splittings with denominators, as follows:
Let M be an arithmetic vector bundle over K.L e tT =( T,s )b ea n M-torsor.T h u s ,
T is an M-torsor. Since Spec( OK) is aﬃne, there exists a splitting of T, i.e., an OK-
isomorphism α : T ∼= M.N o wl e tt ∈ T(K)= TK(K) be a splitting of the MK-torsor TK
40

(where the subscript K denotes “ ⊗OK K”). Then we may deﬁne the ideal of denominators
of t as follows:
It
def
= {a ∈O K | a · αK(t) ∈ M }
(where αK : TK ∼= MK). Since, for any m ∈ M,w eh a v ea·αK(t) ∈ M ⇐⇒ a·αK(t+m) ∈
M, it follows that It does not depend on the choice of α. Note that It will always be a
nonzero ideal in OK. Also, let us write
Den(t)
def
= log( OK/It)+
∑
σ
max{0, log(|t − sσ |σ)}
where the sum ranges over all σ ∈ Σ. Note that t deﬁnes an (integral) splitting (cf.
Deﬁnition 2.2) ∈ T(OK) if and only if Den(t)=0 .
Deﬁnition 3.1. For t ∈ TK, we shall refer to the ideal It ⊆O K as the ideal of de-
nominators of t. Morever, we deﬁne the size of the denominators of t to be the number
Den(t) ∈ R≥0.I f λ ∈ R, then we shall call a sectiont ∈ T(K)a splitting with denominators
of size ≤ λ if Den(t) ≤ λ. Finally, we shall say that t is integral at a prime p (respectively,
σ ∈ Σ) of K if p does not lie in the support of OK/It (respectively, |t − sσ |σ ≤ 1).
Theorem 3.2. There exists a universal constantC ∈ R with the following property: Let
E be an arithmetic vector bundle of rank r over a number ﬁeld K which is equipped with
a ﬁltration of arithmetic vector bundles
0= E0 ⊆ E1 ⊆ E2 ⊆ ... ⊆ Er−1 ⊆ Er = E
such that for all i =0 ,... ,r , the subquotients Li
def
= Ei/Ei−1 are arithmetic line bundles
which satisfy the inequality
deg(Li) > log(DK)
(where d
def
=[ K : Q]). Then any E-torsor T admits a splitting with denominators of size
≤ 1
2log(DK)+ C · rd(log(rd)+1 )
(cf. Deﬁnition 3.1).
41

Proof. Just as in the proof of Theorem 2.4, forλ ∈ R>0,w ew r i t eOK(λ) for the arithmetic
line bundle over K deﬁned as follows: The underlying OK-module of OK(λ)i s OK;t h e
norm of 1 ∈O K at each σ ∈ Σi sg i v e nb y|1|σ
def
= λ−1.T h u s ,i fλ is much greater than 1,
OK(λ) will have lots of global sections (i.e., its h 0 will be large). Observe further that if
λ ≥ 1, then one has a natural inclusion
OK = OK(1) ↪→ OK(λ)
(which induces the identity mapOK →O K on the underlyingOK-modules). This inclusion
is integral at all the primes (ﬁnite and inﬁnite) of K.
If E is an arithmetic vector bundle on K,l e tu sw r i t eE(λ)
def
= E ⊗OK
OK(λ). Note
that
deg(E(λ)) = deg(E)+ rd · log(λ)
If λ ≥ 1, we have a natural inclusion
E(λ−1) ↪→ E
(given by tensoring the inclusion of the preceding paragraph with E(λ−1)). Note that
by “pushing forward” (or, equivalently, executing a “change of structure group”) via this
inclusion, any E(λ−1)-torsor induces an E-torsor. Moreover, it follows easily from the
deﬁnitions that every E-torsor arises in this fashion from some (not necessarily unique)
E(λ−1)-torsor.
Now let λ ∈ R be ≥ 1. Let us assume that we are given an E-torsor, together
with an E(λ−1)-torsor from which it arises. This E(λ−1)-torsor may be thought of as
corresponding to an exact sequence (cf. Example 2.3)
0 → E(λ−1) → M → OK → 0
If we tensor this exact sequence with OK(λ), then we obtain an exact sequence
0 → E → M(λ) → OK(λ) → 0
Now we would like to compute (cf. the proof of Theorem 2.4) the various h0’s of this exact
sequence. Let us write C′ (> 0) for the universal constant of Theorem 1.5. Then Theorem
1.5 implies that
h0(M(λ)) ≥ h0((M(λ))∗) − (r +1 )C′d(log(d)+l o g (r + 1) + 1) +χ(M(λ))
≥ deg(M(λ)) − 2C′rd(log(rd)+2 )+( r +1 )χ(OK)
=d e g (E)+ d · log(λ) − 2C′rd(log(rd)+2 )+( r +1 )χ(OK)
42

Next, let us observe that for i =0 ,... ,r ,w eh a v e
deg(L
∗
i )=d e g (ωK) − deg(Li) ≤ log(DK) − deg(Li) < 0
(by Proposition 1.4 and the assumptions on E). Thus, in particular, we have (for i =
0,... ,r )h 0(L
∗
i ) = 0. Since the given ﬁltration on E induces a ﬁltration on E
∗
with
subquotients equal to L
∗
i (for i =0 ,... ,r ), we thus obtain:
h0(E
∗
)=0
In particular, Theorem 1.5 implies that
h0(E) ≤ χ(E)+ C′rd(log(rd)+1 )
=d e g (E)+ r · χ(OK)+ C′rd(log(rd)+1 )
Putting everything together, we see that
h0(M(λ)) − h0(E) ≥ χ(OK)+ d · log(λ) − 3C′rd(log(rd)+2 )
≥ d · log(λ) − 1
2log(DK) − 3C′rd(log(rd)+2 )
Now let us set
λ
def
= 1
2dlog(DK)+ C · r(log(rd)+1 )
where C
def
=7 C′. Then we obtain that h0(M(λ)) − h0(E) > 0, i.e., there exists some
globally integral m ∈ M(λ) whose imagem′ in OK(λ)i s nonzero. Moreover, the zero locus
of m′ ∈ OK(λ) has logarithmic degree = deg(OK(λ)) = d · log(λ). Thus, sorting through
the deﬁnitions, we conclude that m
m′ deﬁnes a splitting of the torsor T with denominators
of size
≤ d · λ = 1
2log(DK)+ C · rd(log(rd)+1 )
as desired. ⃝
43

§4. Examples from Geometry
In this §, we survey various examples ofArakelov-theoretic torsors that arise naturally
in arithmetic geometry. For a more detailed discussion of the ideas surrounding this topic,
we refer to the Introductions of [Mzk1,2] (especially, §0.8, 2.3, of the Introduction to
[Mzk2]). In particular, we explain the relationship of the general notion of a torsor in
Arakelov theory to the main topic of this paper, which is, eﬀectively,the study of a speciﬁc
Arakelov-theoretic torsor canonically associated to the universal extension of an elliptic
curve.
Let K be a ﬁnite extension of Q, whose ring of integers we denote O
K.L e t X be
a smooth scheme over OK.L e t L be a line bundle on X.T h e nL admits a connection
Zariski locally on X (since Zariski locally it is isomorphic to the trivial line bundle), hence
naturally deﬁnes a cohomology class
c1(L) ∈ H1(X, ΩX/OK )
which is the Hodge-theoretic ﬁrst Chern class of the line bundle L. More geometrically,
one may think of the space of connections on L as a torsor
TL → X
over the vector bundle ΩX/OK .T h a ti st os a y ,ΩX/OK acts on TL (by adding a diﬀerential
ω to a given connection∇ to form a new connection∇ +ω), and moreover, any two sections
of TL diﬀer by a section of ΩX/OK .
Typically, this torsor will not admit any algebraic sections X → TL over X (cf., e.g.,
[Mzk1], Chapter I, §3, Theorem 3.4). In fact, if the topological ﬁrst Chern class of L (with
coeﬃcients in Q) is nonzero, then it follows that such sections do not exist. For instance,
if L is ample and X is proper (of dimension ≥ 1) over OK, then its ﬁrst Chern class will
be nonzero, so TL → X will not admit any global sections.
Write
X
def
= X(C)
for the complex manifold associated to X over C. More generally, in the following dis-
cussion, we shall use ordinary Roman letters for algebraic objects overZ, and calligraphic
letters for the associated complex analytic objects. (The sole exception to this rule will be
the notation “ O” for the structure sheaf.) Thus, we write TL
def
= TL(C). Then one may
consider real analytic sections
s : X→ T L
44

of the torsor TL →X . Typically, holomorphic sections will not exist (for instance, if X is
proper, then holomorphic sections are equivalent to algebraic ones). However, if one works
instead in the real analytic category, then it is not diﬃcult to show that real analytic
sections always exist. For instance, if |−|
L is a C∞ metric on the line bundle L,t h e n
it is a well-known fact from complex geometry (cf., e.g., [Wells], Chapter III, §2) that
|−| L deﬁnes a natural C∞ connection ∇ on L. Thus, (by taking the “(1 ,0)-part” of)
the connection ∇ deﬁnes a C∞ section of the torsor TL →X .I f |−| L is real analytic
(and, in fact, it is not diﬃcult to show that every C∞ metric may be approximated by
a real analytic one), then the corresponding section of TL →X will be real analytic. In
summary,
Real analytic metrics on L deﬁne real analytic sections of TL →X .
Moreover, if a real analytic |−| L deﬁnes the section s : TL →X , then the real analytic
(1,1)-form
∂(s) ∈ Γreal analytic(X, ∧1,1 ΩX )
on X is (up to a universal constant factor) the curvature of the metric |−| L.
Next, we list some typical examples of this sort of situation:
Example 4.1. X = an abelian variety over an open subset of Spec(OK). In this case,
there is a unique (up to constant multiple) real analytic metric on L whose curvature is
invariant with respect to translation (cf. [Mumf3], §12). Thus, we have canonical metrics
on L. For instance, in the case whereX is an elliptic curve E,a n dL = OE(eE)( w h e r eeE
is the origin of E), TL has a natural abelian group scheme structure (cf. Chapter III, §1,
4). This abelian group scheme is called the universal extension of E and is denoted by E†
(cf. Chapter III for a more detailed discussion of the universal extension). Moreover, in
this case, the real analytic section E→E † deﬁned by the canonical metric on L is simply
the section deﬁned by the real analytic subvariety
E†
R ⊆E †
which is the closure of the torsion points of E† . We refer to the discussion of the “Real
Analytic Splitting” in Chapter III,§3, for more details. This splitting in the case of elliptic
curves will play a fundamental role in this paper.
Example 4.2. X = Ag, the moduli stack of principally polarized abelian varieties of
dimension g over Z. In this case, the Siegel upper half-plane uniformization of the analytic
stack Ag carries a natural K¨ahler metric which is the unique metric on the Siegel upper
half-plane that is invariant with respect to the natural action of Sp2g(R) on the Siegel
45

upper half-plane. For instance, if g = 1, then this metric is the well-known Poincar´e
metric
dx ∧ dy
y2
on the upper half-plane. This metric induces a real analytic metric on the canonical bundle
of Ag (which is well-known to be ample).
Example 4.3. X is a hyperbolic curve over an open subset ofSpec(OK). (A “hyperbolic
curve” is a family of curves obtained by removing a divisor of degreer which is ´etale over
the base from a family of smooth, proper, connected genusg curves such that 2g−2+r> 0.)
In this case, it follows from a well-known theorem (“K¨obe’s uniformization theorem”) of
complex analysis that the univeral cover of the associated analytic object X is (a disjoint
union of copies of) the upper half-plane. Thus, the Poincar´e metric on the upper half-plane
descends to deﬁne a real analytic K¨ahler metric on X. Moreover, this real analytic K¨ahler
metric deﬁnes a real analytic metric on the canonical bundle of X (cf. the Introductions
to [Mzk1,2]).
Example 4.4. X = Mg,r, the moduli stack of hyperbolic curves of type (g,r ) over Z.
In this case, there is a canonical real analytic K¨ ahler metric on the associated analytic
object Mg,r called the Weil-Petersson metric. This real analytic K¨ahler metric deﬁnes a
real analytic metric on the canonical bundle of Mg,r (cf. the Introductions to [Mzk1,2]).
We also note that the case of openX,o ro f X which have semi-stable reduction over OK,
may be handled in a parallel fashion to the smooth case, usinglog structures.S i n c ew ed o
not need to use log structures in any rigorous sense in the present survey, we leave this
generalization to the reader.
Thus, to summarize, we see that canonical line bundles L on smooth O
K-schemes X
naturally deﬁne torsors TL (over the sheaf of diﬀerentials ΩX/OK on X) which typically
have natural real analytic sections at the inﬁnite primes of K arising from canonical real
analytic K¨ahler metrics on X(C). In particular, if one is given an OK-rational point
x ∈ X(OK)
then, by restriction, one obtains a torsor TL|x over the OK-vector bundle Ω X/OK |x,
equipped with trivializations at the inﬁnite primes of K (obtained by restricting the nat-
ural real analytic section of TL →X ). Since Ω X/OK |x also gets a metric (obtained by
restricting the K¨ahler metric on X = X(C)), we thus see that we get precisely the data
of Deﬁnition 2.1, i.e., for each rational point x, we obtain an arithmetic torsor (as in §2)
naturally associated to x. This shows how arithmetic torsors arise naturally in arithmetic
geometry.
46

In the present paper, we will especially be interested in the cases where X is either
(i) an elliptic curve E, or (ii) the moduli stack of elliptic curves overZ. In fact, the torsor
arising from Examples 4.2, 4.3, above in the case of the moduli stack of elliptic curves
may be thought of as precisely the torsor obtained from the tautological elliptic curve by
looking at tangent space to the origin of the universal extension of the tautological elliptic
curve (cf. Chapter III, Proposition 1.3; Chapter III, §3, “The Real Analytic Splitting”;
[Mzk2], Introduction, §0.7, 0.8). Thus, in summary, the torsors that we are interested in
in the present paper all arise as the restriction to some sort of rational point (where (ii)
above corresponds eﬀectively to the case where the rational point is valued in some sort of
ring of “dual numbers”) of the arithmetic torsor
(E† → E, E†
R ⊆E † )
given by the universal extension of an elliptic curve. Put another way,
The main goal of the present paper is to understand the arithmetic torsor
(E† → E, E†
R ⊆E † ) given by the universal extension of an elliptic curve.
Bibliography
[Ahlf] L. Ahlfors, Complex Analysis, McGraw-Hill Book Company (1979).
[GS] H. Gillet and C. Soul´e, On the number of lattice points in convex symmetric bodies
and their duals, Israel Journal of Math. 74, pp. 347-357 (1991).
[Mumf1,2,3] D. Mumford, On the equations deﬁning abelian varieties I, II, III, Invent. Math. 1
(1966), pp. 287-354; 3 (1967), pp. 71-135; 3 (1967), pp. 215-244.
[Mzk1] S. Mochizuki, A Theory of Ordinary p-adic Curves, RIMS Preprint 1033 (September
1995); Publ. of RIMS 32, No. 6 (1996), pp. 957-1151.
[Mzk2] S. Mochizuki, Foundations of p-adic Teichm¨uller Theory, AMS/IP Studies in Ad-
vanced Mathematics 11, American Mathematical Society/International Press (1999).
[Szp] L. Szpiro, Degr´es, intersections, hauteurs in Ast´erisque 127 (1985), pp. 11-28.
[Wells] R. O. Wells, Diﬀerential Analysis on Complex Manifolds, Graduate Texts in Mathe-
matics 65, Springer (1980).
47

Chapter II: The Galois Action on Torsion Points
§0. Introduction
In some sense, the main goal of the present paper is to prove acomparison theoremthat
relates the natural Arakelov-theoretic torsorsarising from an elliptic curve (cf. Chapter I,
especially, Chapter I, §4) to the Galois action on the torsion points of the elliptic curve.
In Chapter I, we introduced the “torsor side” of this comparison; thus, in the present
Chapter, we wish to discuss the “torsion point side” of the comparison. More precisely, in
this Chapter, we show that, in certain situations, the Galois action on the torsion points
of an elliptic curve is as transitive as possible, i.e., that (cf. Theorem 4.4):
If we consider all elliptic curves over number ﬁelds of bounded degree
which have semi-stable reduction everywhere and at least one prime of
bad reduction, then for any prime numberl of the order of the heighth
E
of the elliptic curve, the image of the associated Galois representation
in GL2(Zl) contains SL2(Zl).
In particular, the elliptic curve will not have any rational torsion points of order l.T h u s ,
this result may be regarded as a sort of “poor man’s uniform boundedness conjecture” (now
Merel’s theorem ([Mer]) – although, in fact, it is not strictly implied by Merel’s theorem).
Alternatively, it may regarded as an eﬀective version of a theorem of Serre ([Ser], Chapter
IV, Theorem 3.2).
The proof is similar to that of Faltings’ proof of the Tate Conjecture ([Falt]), only
technically much simpler. That is to say, the main technique is essentially the standard
one (going back to Tate) for proving “Tate conjecture-type results.”
§1. Some Elementary Group Theory
Let l ≥ 5 be a prime number. In this §, we review some well-known results concerning
the group theory of SL
2(Zl).
Lemma 1.1. Let G ⊆ SL2(Fl) be the subgroup generated by the matrices α
def
=
(11
01
)
,
β
def
=
(10
11
)
.T h e nG = SL2(Fl).
Proof. Note that if μ, λ ∈ Fl,t h e nβμ · αλ (where this expression makes sense since
both αl and βl are equal to the identity matrix) takes the vector v
def
=
(0
1
)
to
( λ
μ·λ+1
)
.I n
48

particular, if we let γ
def
=
(01
10
)
, then for any λ ∈ F×
l ,w eh a v eγ· v,λ · γ· v ∈ G · v.W et h u s
obtain that λ · v ∈ G · v. Thus, in summary, we have proven that F2
l −{
(0
0
)
}⊆ G · v.
Now let us prove that an arbitrary element δ ∈ SL2(Fl) is contained in G.B y t h e
conclusion of the preceding paragraph, we may assume thatδ·v = v. But this implies that
δ is an upper triangular matrix all of whose diagonal entries are “1.” Thus, δ is a power
of α, hence contained in G, as desired. ⃝
Corollary 1.2. The ﬁnite group SL2(Fl) is simple.
Proof. Let λ ∈ F×
l be such that λ2 ̸= 1. (Note that such λ exists since l ≥ 5.) Let
ϵ
def
=
(λ 0
0 λ−1
)
.T h e nϵ · α · ϵ−1 · α−1 = αλ2 −1.T h u s ,α (and, similarly, β) is contained in the
commutator subgroup of SL2(Fl), so Corollary 1.2 follows from Lemma 1.1. ⃝
Lemma 1.3. Let G ⊆ GL2(Fl) be a subgroup that contains the matrix α
def
=
(11
01
)
,a s
well as at least one matrix that is not upper triangular. Then SL2(Fl) ⊆ G.
Proof. Note that α generates an l-Sylow subgroup S of GL2(Fl), and that the number
of l-Sylow subgroups of GL2(Fl) is precisely l + 1. Since the normalizer of S in GL2(Fl)
is the set of upper triangular matrices, and we have assumed that G contains at least one
such matrix, it follows that the number nG of l-Sylow subgroups of G is ≥ 2. On the
other hand, by the general theory of Sylow subgroups, it follows that nG is congruent to
1 modulo l.S i n c e 2≤ nG ≤ l + 1, we thus obtain that nG = l + 1. In particular, in
the notation of Lemma 1.1, we conclude that α,β ∈ G. Thus, by Lemma 1.1, we have
SL2(Fl) ⊆ G, as desired. ⃝
Corollary 1.4. Let l be a prime number ≥ 5.L e t G ⊆ GL2(Zl) be a closed subgroup
whose image H in GL2(Fl) contains the matrix α
def
=
(11
01
)
, as well as a matrix which is
not upper triangular. Then SL2(Zl) ⊆ G.
Proof. By Lemma 1.3, we have thatSL2(Fl) ⊆ H.L e tG′ ⊆ SL2(Zl) be the commutator
subgroup of G. Thus, by Corollary 1.2, G′ surjects onto SL2(Fl). Now by [Ser], Chapter
IV, §3.4, Lemma 3, this implies that SL2(Zl)= G′ ⊆ G, as desired. ⃝
§2. The Height of an Elliptic Curve
Let K be a number ﬁeld ,o fd e g r e ed over Q.L e t E → Spec(OK) be a semi-abelian
variety of dimension 1 whose generic ﬁberEK is proper. Thus, EK is an elliptic curve over
K.L e tu sw r i t e
49

ωE
for the ﬁnite, ﬂat OK-module of rank one consisting of the invariant diﬀerentials onE.
If σ : K↪ → C is a complex embedding, then we get a natural metric on ( ωE)σ
def
=
(ωE) ⊗K,σ C by integration: if α ∈ (ωE)σ,t h e n
|α|2 def
=
∫
Eσ
α ∧ α
(where Eσ
def
= E ⊗K,σ C,a n dα is the complex conjugate of α). Thus, by equipping ωE
which this metric at the archimedean places ofK, we obtain an arithmetic line bundle ωE
(cf. Chapter I, Deﬁnition 1.1). Let us write
hE
def
=d e g (ωE) ∈ R
This number is often referred to as the Faltings height of the elliptic curve E.
Next, let us observe that E → Spec(OK) deﬁnes a classifying morphism
φ :S p e c (OK) → M1,0
where M1,0 is the moduli stack of semi-abelian varieties of dimension one over Z.A s
is well-known, this stack has a “divisor at inﬁnity” ∞ M ⊆ M1,0, whose complement
M1,0 ⊆ M1,0 is the moduli stack of elliptic curves over Z. Thus, we may consider the
divisor
∞ E
def
= φ−1(∞ M) ⊆ Spec(OK)
Moreover, we let
deg(∞ E)
def
= log(#( O∞ E )) ∈ R
Now we have the following well-known result:
Proposition 2.1. There exists a universal constant C (independent of K, d,a n d E)
such that: 1
12 · deg(∞ E) ≤ hE + d · C.
Proof. This follows immediately from the formula of Proposition 1.1 of [Silv2], together
with the fact that the archimedean term on the right-hand side of this formula is universally
bounded below by d · C,w h e r eC is a universal constant independent of K, d,a n dE. ⃝
50

Proposition 2.2. Let α ∈ R. Then the number of isomorphism classes of elliptic curves
EK over number ﬁelds K of degree ≤ d such that hE ≤ α is ﬁnite.
Proof. This follows from [Silv1], Proposition 8.2 and [Silv2], Proposition 1.1. ⃝
§3. The Galois Action on the Torsion of a Tate Curve
Let K be a ﬁnite extension of Qp,w h e r ep is a prime number. Let us denote its residue
ﬁeld by k; the maximal ideal of its ring of integers by mK; and its associated valuation
map by vK : K× → Z (normalized so that vK is surjective). Also, let us write K for
an algebraic closure of K,a n dΓK
def
= Gal(K/K). Let E → Spec(OK) be a semi-abelian
scheme of dimension one over OK. Let us assume, moreover, that the generic ﬁber EK of
E is proper, while the special ﬁber Ek of E is equal to (Gm)k, the multiplicative group
over k.
Let l be a prime number (possibly equal to p). Let us write
Ml(E)
def
= Hom(Z/l · Z,E (K))
for the “mod l”T a t em o d u l eof EK.T h u s ,Ml(E) is (noncanonically) isomorphic as an
Fl-module to F2
l , and is, moreover, equipped with a continuous action by Γ K (induced
by the natural action of Γ K on K). Also, it is well-known (see, e.g., [FC], Chapter III,
Corollary 7.3) that Ml(E) ﬁts into a natural exact sequence of ΓK-modules
0 → Fl(1) → Ml(E) → Fl → 0
where the “(1)” is a Tate twist, and “ Fl” is equipped with the trivial Galois action.
Moreover, the extension class associated to this exact sequence is precisely that obtained
by extracting an l
th root of the Tate parameter qE ∈ mK. The Tate parameter is an
element of mK that is naturally associated to E and has the property that the subscheme
OK/(qE) is equal to the pull-back via the classifying morphism Spec(OK) → M1,0 of the
divisor ∞ M ⊆ M1,0. Thus, the above exact sequence splits if and only ifqE has an lth root
in K. Note that in order for this to happen, it must be the case that vK(qE) is divisible
by l. In particular, we have the following result:
Lemma 3.1. Suppose that N ⊆ Ml(E) is a one-dimensional Fl-subspace which is
stabilized by ΓK.T h e neither vK(qE) ∈ l ·Z, or N is equal to the subspaceFl(1) ⊆ Ml(E)
of the above exact sequence.
Deﬁnition 3.2. We shall refer to vK(qE) ∈ Z>0 as the local height of E.
51

Next, let us recall that the submodule Fl(1) ⊆ Ml(E) deﬁnes a ﬁnite, ﬂat subgroup
scheme
μl ⊆ E
over OK. Thus, we may form the quotient
E′ def
= E/μl
Then E′ → Spec(OK) is a one-dimensional semi-abelian scheme over OK whose special
ﬁber is (Gm)k and whose generic ﬁber is proper. Moreover, its Tate parameterqE′ satisﬁes
qE′ = ql
E
Let us write
deg(∞ E)
def
= log(#( OK/(qE))) ∈ R
Then we have
deg(∞ E′ )= l · deg(∞ E)
§4. An Eﬀective Estimate of the Image of Galois
Let us write Q for an algebraic closure of Q.L e t K be a subﬁeld of Q of degree
d< ∞ over Q,a n dl e tE → Spec(OK)b ea si n §2.
Let l be a prime number. Suppose that we are given a subgroup scheme GK ⊆ EK
(over K) such that over Q, GK becomes isomorphic to Z/l · Z. We shall call such GK l-
cyclic.W r i t e(EG)K for the quotient ofEK by GK. Note that since (EG)K is isogenous to
EK, it has semi-stable reduction at all the primes ofK, hence extends to a one-dimensional
semi-abelian scheme EG → Spec(OK).
Lemma 4.1. Suppose that GK ⊆ EK is l-cyclic, and that l is greater than the local
heights of E at all of its primes of bad (multiplicative) reduction. Then there exists a
universal constant C (independent of K, d,a n dE) such that
1
12l · deg(∞ E) ≤ hE + d · C +2 d · log(l)
52

Proof. Note that the assumption on l implies (by Lemma 3.1) that at all the primes of
bad reduction, GK corresponds to the subspace Fl(1) of Lemma 3.1. Thus, at primes of
bad reduction, EG may be identiﬁed with the elliptic curve E′ discussed at the end of §3.
In particular,
deg(∞ EG )= l · deg(∞ E)
On the other hand, the degree l covering morphism (EG)K → EK extends (cf., e.g.,
[FC], Chapter I, Proposition 2.7) to a morphism EG → E. Thus, we have a natural
inclusion ωE ⊆ ωEG whose cokernel is annihilated by l. Moreover, since integrating a
(1,1)-form over Eσ diﬀers from integrating over (E/G)σ by a factor of l, it follows that
deg(ωEG ) ≤ deg(ωE)+2 d · log(l)
Thus, Lemma 4.1 follows from Proposition 2.1. ⃝
Lemma 4.2. There exists a universal (positive) constant C (independent of d)s u c h
that for each positive integerd, there exists a ﬁnite subset Ed ⊆M 1,0(Q) with the following
property: Suppose that there exists an l-cyclic GK ⊆ EK,w h e r e[K : Q]= d; EK is an
elliptic curve over K with semi-stable reduction at all primes and at least one prime of bad
reduction; and l ≥ 100 · (hE + C · d2). Then the point of [EK] ∈M 1,0(Q) deﬁned by EK
belongs to Ed.
Proof. First, observe that if v is any local height of EK,t h e nd e g (∞ E) ≥ v · log(2).
Thus, Proposition 2.1 implies that by choosing C appropriately, we may assume that
hE + C · d2 ≥ hE + C · d ≥ 1
12 · deg(∞ E). Thus, we obtain that
l ≥ 100
12 · deg(∞ E)
≥ (100 · log(2)
12 ) · v
>v
which shows that the hypotheses of Lemma 4.1 are satisﬁed. Thus, we conclude (from
Lemma 4.1) that if we choose C so that l ≥ 48d·log(l)
log(2) (cf. Lemma 4.3 below) then
1
12l · deg(∞ E) ≤ hE + d · C′ +2 d · log(l)
≤ hE + d · C′ + l · log(2)
24
53

for some universal constant C′. Next, observe that since EK has at least one prime of bad
reduction, it follows that log(2) ≤ deg(∞ E). Thus, substituting into the above inequality,
we obtain that
l · log(2)
24 ≤ hE + d · C′
On the other hand, log(2)
24 ≥ 2
100 , and, by assumption, l ≥ 100 · hE, so (substituting) we
obtain that 2hE ≤ hE + d · C′, i.e., hE ≤ d · C′. But this implies, by Proposition 2.2, that
[EK] belongs to some ﬁnite exceptional set Ed, as desired. ⃝
Lemma 4.3. Let x and y be real numbers such that x, y ≥ 2,a n d x ≥ 2y2.T h e n
x ≥ y · log(x).
Proof. First observe that y ≥ 1
2 · log(2) + log(y)f o ry ≥ 2. Indeed, this is true for y =1
(since 4 ≥ 3 ≥ 3 · log(2)), and the function φ(y)= y − log(y) has derivative 1 − 1
y ,w h i c h
is ≥ 0f o ry ≥ 1. Thus when x =2 y2,w eh a v ex =2 y2 ≥ 2y · log(2
1
2 · y)= y · log(x), as
desired. Moreover, the function ψ(x)= x − y · log(x) has derivative 1 − y
x ,w h i c hi s≥ 0
for x ≥ 2y2 ≥ 2y ≥ y (since y ≥ 1). Thus, ψ(x) is increasing for x ≥ 2y2,s o ψ(x) ≥ 0f o r
x ≥ 2y2, as desired. ⃝
Theorem 4.4. There exist:
(1) a universal (positive) constant C (independent of d); and
(2) for each positive integer d, a ﬁnite subset Ed ⊆M 1,0(Q)
with the following property: Suppose that
(i.) K ⊆ Q is a subﬁeld of degree d< ∞ ;
(ii.) EK is an elliptic curve over K with semi-stable reduction at all
primes and at least one prime of bad reduction;
(iii.) the isomorphism class [EK] ∈M 1,0(Q) does not belong to Ed;
(iv.) l is a prime number ≥ 100 · (hE + C · d2).
Then the image of the Galois representation Gal(Q/K) → GL2(Zl) associated to EK
contains SL2(Zl).
54

Proof. As we saw in the proof of Lemma 4.2, in the situation under consideration, the
local height of EK at a ﬁnite prime of EK of bad reduction can never be divisible by l.
Since, by hypothesis, at least one such ﬁnite prime exists, it follows that the image of
Galois in GL2(Fl) contains the element “ α” (cf. Corollary 1.4), i.e.,
(11
01
)
.M o r e o v e r , b y
Lemma 4.2, it follows that the image of Galois in GL2(Fl) contains at least one matrix
which is not upper triangular. Thus, we conclude from Corollary 1.4 that the image of
Galois in GL
2(Zl) contains SL2(Zl), as desired. ⃝
Bibliography
[Falt] G. Faltings,Endlichkeitss¨atze f¨ur abelsche Variet¨aten ¨uber Zahlk¨orpern, Invent. Math.
73, pp. 349-366 (1983).
[FC] G. Faltings and C.-L. Chai, Degenerations of Abelian Varieties, Springer (1990).
[Mer] L. Merel, Bornes pour la torsion des courbes elliptiques sur les corps de nombres ,
Invent. Math. 124, pp. 437-449 (1996).
[Ser] J.-P. Serre, Abelian l-adic Representations and Elliptic Curves, Benjamin (1968).
[Silv1] J.H. Silverman, The Theory of Height Functions in Arithmetic Geometry,e d .b yG .
Cornell and J.H. Silverman, Springer (1986).
[Silv2] J.H. Silverman, Heights and Elliptic Curvesin Arithmetic Geometry, ed. by G. Cornell
and J.H. Silverman, Springer (1986).
55

Chapter III: The Universal Extension
of a Log Elliptic Curve
§0. Introduction
In this Chapter, we review various well-known facts concerning the universal extension
of an elliptic curve. The main ideas that we discuss are as follows: Given a log elliptic
curve (cf. Deﬁnition 1.1) E → S, we deﬁne its universal extension E† → E (cf. Deﬁnition
1.2) as a certain group scheme of line bundles onE of degree 0 equipped with a connection.
For degenerating log elliptic curves (i.e., “Tate curves”), this universal extension admits
a canonical splitting (cf. Theorem 2.1) which is essentially uniquely characterized by the
fact that it is a group homomorphism. The universal extensionE† → E also has a Hodge-
theoretic interpretation (cf. Theorem 4.2) as the Hodge-theoretic ﬁrst Chern class of the
divisor deﬁned by the origin of E. Moreover, this Hodge-theoretic interpretation of the
universal extension allows one to analytically continue (cf. Theorem 5.6) the canonical
splitting, relative to the function-theoretic context of [Mumf]. We construct this analytic
continuation by studying the Schottky-Weierstrass ζ-function (cf. §5), which is a certain
analogue of the classical Weierstrass ζ-function, but for the Schottky uniformization (as
opposed to the full uniformization by the complex plane, as in the classical case) of an
elliptic curve. This analytic continuation allows one to give explicit coordinates for the
torsion points of the universal extension(cf. Corollary 5.9), which play a fundamental role
in this paper. During our analysis of the universal extension, we pause, in §3( c f . a l s o
Remark 2 in §6), to review the complex analogues of the ideas discussed in this Chapter.
Finally, in §6, 7, we discuss certain “higher” analogues of the Schottky-Weierstrass ζ-
function.
§1. Deﬁnition of the Universal Extension
In this §, we would like to deﬁne a certain canonical extension of a “log elliptic curve”
– called the universal extension of the log elliptic curve – which will play a key role in the
present paper. One useful reference for this universal extension (in the non-logarithmic
case) is Appendix C of [Katz].
Let
M1,1
56

be the moduli stack of one-pointed stable curves of genus one overZ (see, e.g., [Knud] for
more details). Note that M1,1 is equipped with a natural log structure (in the sense of
[Kato]) deﬁned by its divisor at inﬁnity. We denote the resulting log stack by M
log
1,1.L e t
(C→ M1,1,ϵ : M1,1 →C )
denote the tautological one-pointed stable curve of genus one. Now observe that the inverse
image on C of the divisor at inﬁnity of M1,1 is a divisor with normal crossings on C, hence
deﬁnes in a natural way a log structure on C. Denote the resulting log stack by Clog.L e t
M
log
1,0
def
= M
log
1,1. Thus, we have a natural log smooth morphism
Clog → M
log
1,0
together with a section ϵ : M1,0 →C .L e t E⊆C be the open substack of C of points
that are smooth over M1,0.S i n c eϵ maps into E, we have (by abuse of notation) a section
ϵ : M1,0 →E .M o r e o v e r ,
(E→ M1,0,ϵ : M1,0 →E )
forms a semi-abelian scheme (see, e.g., [FC], Deﬁnition 2.3 of Chapter I, for more details)
of dimension 1 over M1,0.
Deﬁnition 1.1. We shall refer to ( Clog → M
log
1,0,ϵ : M1,0 →E )a st h e universal log
elliptic curve.I f Slog is a ﬁne noetherian log scheme (see [Kato] for more details), then we
shall refer to the datum of a morphism α : Slog → M
log
1,0 as a log elliptic curve.
This deﬁnition prompts the following basic remarks:
(1) The point of distinguishing M
log
1,0 from M
log
1,1 (even though both nota-
tions denote the same log stack) is thatthe natural log structures of the
tautological objects that they parametrize diﬀer. This leads for instance
to diﬀerent canonical p-adic uniformization theories (as in [Mzk1]).
(2) Let α : Slog → M
log
1,0 be a log elliptic curve. Then pulling back Clog →
M
log
1,0, E,a n dϵ gives rise to Clog → Slog, E → S, e : E → S.O f t e n ,
by abuse of terminology, we shall say “let Clog → Slog be a log elliptic
curve.” This means that implicitly we assume that some α has been
given and that Clog has been constructed from α in the fashion just
described.
This completes the discussion of the deﬁnition of a log elliptic curve.
57

Let
flog : Clog → Slog
be a log elliptic curve.L e t
ωE
def
= e∗ΩE/S
Thus, ωE is a line bundle on S.L e t W → S denote the aﬃne group scheme deﬁned by
ωE.T h u s ,W is the spectrum of the symmetric algebra of τE
def
= ω∨
E (the dual bundle to
ωE)o v e rOS. Now we would like to deﬁne a natural extension of group schemes
0 → W → E† → E → 0
(cf. Appendix C, §C1, of [Katz]), as follows. First, let T be an S-scheme. Since E† will
be deﬁned as a functor over E, points of E† (T) will consist of points of E(T) plus some
extra information:
We deﬁne E† (T) to be the set of isomorphism classes of pairs ( x, ∇x),
where x ∈ E(T), and ∇x is a logarithmic connection (with respect to
the morphism Clog → Slog) o nt h el i n eb u n d l eLx
def
= OCT (x − e)( w h e r e
CT = C ×S T).
(Here in the notation “OCT (x − e),” we use “e” (respectively, “x”) to denote the (Cartier)
divisor deﬁned by the image of the section e (respectively, x)i n CT .) It is immediately
clear that E† is a torsor over E under the group scheme W (since ωE may be identiﬁed
with the push-forward of Ω Clog/Slog via flog : Clog → Slog). Moreover, E† has a natural
abelian group law of its own given as follows: The sum of ( x, ∇x)a n d(y, ∇y) is the line
bundle Lx+y ∼= Lx ⊗OCT
Ly equipped with the connection ∇x ⊗∇ y.
Deﬁnition 1.2. We shall refer to the exact sequence
0 → W → E† → E → 0
of smooth, abelian group schemes over S as the universal extension of E → S (or Clog →
Slog).
Let
H
def
= R1flog
DR,∗OC
58

be the ﬁrst (logarithmic) de Rham cohomology module of flog : Clog → Slog (see, e.g.,
[Kato]). Then H is a rank two vector bundle on S equipped with a ﬁltration called the
Hodge ﬁltration. This ﬁltration gives rise to an exact sequence
0 → ωE →H→ τE → 0
Proposition 1.3. There is a canonical isomorphism betweenH and the tangent space to
the group scheme E† at the origin. Moreover, the exact sequence above arising from the
Hodge ﬁltration on H corresponds under this isomorphism to the ﬁltration induced on the
tangent space at the origin to E† by the exact sequence 0 → W → E† → E → 0.
Proof. This follows immediately by working over the dual numbersS[ε]/(ε2) and thinking
about the functorial deﬁnitions of E† and de Rham cohomology. ⃝
§2. Canonical Splitting at Inﬁnity
We maintain the notations of §1. In this §, we would like to discuss certain canonical
splittings of the universal extension E† → E of E.
In this §, we assume that the inverse image (via the implicit classifying morphism
α : Slog → M
log
1,0 for the given log elliptic curve) of the divisor at inﬁnity of M1,0 is a
(Cartier) divisor D ⊆ S.W r i t eJ for the ideal deﬁning D.T h u s ,J is a line bundle on S.
Moreover, we have a natural identiﬁcation:
E|D =( Gm)D
Now let ˆS be the completion of S at D.T h u s ,ˆS is a formal scheme. Let us write EˆS for
the formal object obtained by pulling back E → S to ˆS. Then one knows that
EˆS
∼= (Gm)ˆS
(where the isomorphism is an isomorphism ofJ -adic formal group objects over the formal
scheme ˆS). Indeed, this is a relative simple special case (the case already known to Tate) of
the theory of [FC], Chapter III. In fact, this isomorphism is the unique such isomorphism
that reduces to the identity over D (by [FC], Chapter I, Theorem 2.2).
Now let us pull-back the universal extension E† → E to a morphism
E†
ˆS
→ EˆS
59

over ˆS. We would like to construct a certain canonical section of this morphism. This
canonical section will be a homomorphism of group objects . Thus, by [FC], Chapter I,
Theorem 2.2, it will exist and be unique once it is constructed over D.
The deﬁnition of this canonical section overD is given as follows: As discussed above,
we identifyED with (Gm)D. Let us think of the aﬃne ring of (Gm)D as the ring of Laurent
polynomials in an indeterminate u.N o wl e tx be a D-valued point of (Gm)D.T h e n( a si n
Appendix C, §C1, of [Katz]) points of E† lying over x may be identiﬁed with sections of
ωClog/Slog ⊗OS OD that are regular away fromx and e, but have a simple pole with residue
1 (respectively, −1) at x (respectively, e). For instance, if x corresponds to the section ux
of O×
D,t h e n
ωx
def
= du
(u − ux) − du
(u − 1)
is such a diﬀerential. Since the correspondencex ↦→ ωx is clearly functorial, we thus obtain
a scheme-theoretic section
ED → E†
D
It remains to check that this is ahomomorphism of group schemes. To see this, suppose
that y ∈ E(D), z
def
= x · y. Then the isomorphism between OCD (x − e) ⊗O CD (y − e)a n d
OCD (z − e) is given by division by the rational function
(u − 1)(u − uz)
(u − ux)(u − uy)
Moreover, the logarithmic derivative of this rational function is clearly equal toωz −ωx −ωy.
This observation implies that the section constructed is a homomorphism of group schemes,
as desired.
Thus, in summary, we see that we have constructed ahomomorphism of group objects
κ : Eˆ
S → E†
ˆS
in the formal category over ˆS which forms a section of E†
ˆS
→ EˆS. Moreover, since there
are no nontrivial homomorphisms fromGm into W (note: W is Zariski locally isomorphic
to Ga), it follows that κ is the unique such section. We state this as a theorem:
Theorem 2.1. The extension
0 → WˆS → EˆS → E†
ˆS
→ 0
60

of group objects over the formal scheme ˆS admits a unique splitting
κ : EˆS → E†
ˆS
– which we shall refer to as the canonical splitting of this extension. In particular, it
follows that there exists a natural isomorphism
E†
ˆS
∼= (Gm)ˆS × WˆS
of group objects over ˆS.
Now recall that E† may be thought of as an ωE-torsor over E. Thus, in particular,
we may write this torsor as an extension of coherent OE-modules
0 →O E →T → τE |E → 0
Let R
E† be the sheaf of quasi-coherent OE-algebras whose spectrum is E† :
E† = Spec(R
E† )
Thus, Zariski locally on E, R
E† is the symmetric algebra over OE of τE |E.M o r e o v e r ,
there is a natural inclusion
T⊆ R
E†
and T generates R
E† as an OE-algebra. If i is a positive integer, let us denote by
R
E† [i] ⊆R
E†
the OE-submodule of R
E† generated by OE-linear combinations of products of i sections
of T . (Also, let R
E† [0]
def
= OE.)
Deﬁnition 2.2. We shall refer to sections of O
E† that lie inside R
E† [i]a sb e i n gof
torsorial degree ≤ i. More generally, if L is a line bundle on E, then we shall refer to
sections of L⊗ OE O
E† that lie inside L⊗ OE R
E† [i]a sb e i n gof torsorial degree ≤ i.
Now by Theorem 2.1, we have a natural splitting
61

E†
ˆS
∼= EˆS × WˆS
This natural splitting then induces an isomorphism
(R
E† )ˆS
∼= OEˆS
[τE |EˆS
]
(where “[ −]” means “the symmetric algebra of”). That is to say, whereas R
E† is, in gen-
eral, only Zariski locally isomorphic to a polynomial algebra, over ˆS, it becomes naturally
isomorphic to a polynomial algebra (i.e., the symmetric algebra of τE |EˆS
). Thus, if f is a
section of L⊗O
E†
ˆS
, one can make the following deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 2.3. We shall refer to the degree i term of f (relative to the above isomor-
phism of (R
E† )ˆS with a polynomial algebra) as the degree i component
Compi(f) ∈L⊗ OS τ⊗i
E |EˆS
of f.
§3. Canonical Splittings in the Complex Case
Before proceeding, we pause to review the basic theory of the universal extension and
its canonical splittings over the complex numbers (cf., e.g., [Katz], Appendix C). Thus,
let E be an elliptic curve over C. Then its universal extension E† may be constructed
analytically as follows: First, recall the de Rham isomorphism
H1
DR(E, OE) ∼= H1
sing(E, C)
between the de Rham cohomology (algebraic or holomorphic) ofE and the singular coho-
mology of E with complex coeﬃcients. Let
Λ ⊆H
def
= H1
DR(E, OE)
be the subgroup deﬁned (using the de Rham isomorphism) by
H1
sing(E, 2πi · Z) ⊆ H1
sing(E, C)
62

Thus, Λ is a free Z-module of rank 2, and C ⊗Z Λ ∼= H.
Now by Proposition 1.3 and the well-known theory of the (complex analytic) expo-
nential map of a complex Lie group, we have a natural uniformizing map
H→ E†
compatible with the additive group structures of H and E† . Moreover, the kernel of this
homomorphism (cf. the discussion at the end of [Katz], Appendix C, §C5) is
Λ ⊆H
Thus, we have the following:
Proposition 3.1. If E is an elliptic curve over C, then (the complex Lie group deﬁned
by) E† is naturally isomorphic to the quotient
H/Λ
where H is the ﬁrst de Rham cohomology module of E,a n dΛ is the Z-submodule arising
from the singular cohomology of E with coeﬃcients in 2πi · Z.
Next, we would like to discuss certain canonical splittings that exist in the complex
analytic case. In fact, in the complex analytic case, there are three diﬀerent types of
canonical splitting, all of which are well-known and classical, and all of which will be
relevant to the theory of the present paper (but in diﬀerent ways). The three canonical
splittings that we will consider are the following:
The Real Analytic Splitting: Write Λ
R (respectively, ΛC) for Λ ⊗Z R (respectively,
Λ ⊗Z C). Deﬁne
ER
def
=Λ R/Λ ⊆ ΛC/Λ= E†
Thus, ER is a real analytic submanifold of E† . Moreover, it is easy to see that ER maps
bijectively onto E, i.e., we have an isomorphism of real analytic Lie groups
ER ∼= E
Unlike E, however, ER is only a “real analytic torus,” not a complex analytic torus inside
E† . Put another way, ER deﬁnes a real analytic section
63

κR : E → E†
of E† → E which is a homomorphism in the category of real analytic Lie groups.
Deﬁnition 3.2. We shall refer to κR : E → E† as the canonical real analytic section of
E† → E.
Remark 1. Note in particular that since κR is a group homomorphism, it maps torsion
points of E to torsion points of E† . Thus, although κR is only deﬁned in the real analytic
category, its restriction to torsion points can be deﬁned entirely algebraically. For instance,
if E is deﬁned over a number ﬁeld, then the restriction of κR to torsion points of E is also
deﬁned over a number ﬁeld. This fact will be of fundamental importance in this paper.
Remark 2. Although the following discussion will not be very relevant to the present
paper, the reader might wonder (in view of the choice of notation) whetherκR is, in some
sense, “analogous” to the formal analytic κ of Theorem 2.1. In fact, there is an analogy:
Namely, ER ⊆ E† may be obtained as the invariant subset of a certain natural complex
conjugation morphism on E† . Moreover, frequently in discussions of global motives, it is
natural to think of complex conjugation as “Frobenius at the inﬁnite prime.” On the other
hand, the splitting κ may also be constructed p-adically as follows: E† may be thought of
as a certain crystal in group schemes on the log crystalline site of Slog. Put another way,
E† is, in essense, the log crystalline cohomology of Clog → Slog with coeﬃcients in O×.
Moreover, as a log crystalline cohomology object,E† is equipped with a natural Frobenius
action. The section κ may then be constructedp-adically as the uniqueFrobenius invariant
section of E† → E. That is to say, bothκ and κR may be constructed as invariant subsets
of Frobenius actions at ﬁnite and inﬁnite primes, respectively. We refer to the discussion
of [Mzk2], Introduction, §1, for more details.
The G
m-Splitting: To deﬁne this splitting, ﬁx a rank one Z-submodule:
Λ1 ⊆ Λ
This splitting deﬁnes an intermediate covering of the covering deﬁned by the exponential
map of E:
τE → τE/Λ1 → τE/Λ= E
(where by abuse of notation, we also denote by Λ the image of Λ ⊆H under the projec-
tion H→ τE arising from the Hodge ﬁltration). Note that τE/Λ1 is isomorphic (by an
isomorphism which is unique up to composition with the inversion map) to Gm (i.e., the
64

multiplicative group Gm over C, regarded as a complex analytic Lie group). Thus, in the
following discussion, we shall make the following identiﬁcation:
τE/Λ1 = Gm
In other words, the choice of Λ 1 deﬁnes a uniformization of E by Gm.I n p a r t i c u l a r , w e
may think of this uniformization as giving a presentation of E as follows:
E = Gm/qZ
where q ∈ Gm = C×. This uniformization ofE is referred to as theSchottky uniformization
of E (and depends on the choice of Λ1 ⊆ Λ).
Now let us consider the universal extension E† of E. Now we have a commutative
diagram:
Λ1 =Λ 1 =Λ 1
⋂⋂ ⋂
(Λ1)C
def
=Λ 1 ⊗Z C ⊆ ΛC = H− → τE
If we form the quotient of the second line by the ﬁrst, we then obtain two morphisms
(Λ1)C/Λ1 −→ E† |Gm −→ Gm
whose composite is an isomorphism. Put another way, we have constructed aholomorphic
section
κΛ1 : Gm → E† |Gm
of the pull-back of E† → E by Gm → E.
Deﬁnition 3.3. We shall refer to κΛ1 as the Gm-splitting associated to Λ1.
Remark. This splitting is the complex analogue of the splitting of Theorem 2.1. Indeed,
it is not diﬃcult to check that if, in the context of Theorem 2.1, i.e., of a degenerating
elliptic curve, one takes for Λ1 ⊆ H1
sing(E, 2πiZ)= Hsing
1 (E, Z)∨ (where “ ∨” denotes the
dual Z-module) the Z-submodule which is the annihilator of the submodule
Ker{Hsing
1 (E, Z) → Hsing
1 (the degenerate elliptic curve,Z)= Z}
65

i.e., the annihilator of the vanishing cycle, then for this choice of Λ 1, the splitting κΛ1
just constructed coincides with the complex analytic splitting of the universal extension
deﬁned by the κ of Theorem 2.1 in a (complex analytic) neighborhood of the point at
inﬁnity ∞∈ M1,0(C). Indeed, the fact that these two splittings coincide follows from the
fact that there do not exist any nontrivial homomorphisms of complex Lie groupsC× → C.
The η-Splitting: Here, we follow the treatment of [Katz], Appendix C, §C5. Fix a C-
linear isomorphism C ∼= ωE. This isomorphism makes it easier to describe the splitting in
question. In fact, however, the splitting will be entirely independent of the choice of iso-
morphism C ∼= ωE. Once this isomorphism is ﬁxed, we get a choice of invariant diﬀerential
ω = dz (where z is the standard coordinate on C), and so we can write
E = C/Λ
(where by abuse of notation, we also denote by Λ the image of Λ⊆H under the projection
H→ τE arising from the Hodge ﬁltration). Moreover, one has the Weierstrass ℘-function
(see, e.g., [Ahlf], p. 272, for a treatment)
℘(z)
def
= 1
z2 +
∑
0̸=λ∈Λ
( 1
(z − λ)2 − 1
λ2
)
Let us write x
def
= ℘(z), and y
def
= ℘′(z) (the derivative with respect to z). Then, as stated
in [Katz], Appendix C, §C5, the diﬀerentials
ω = dx
y and η
def
= xd x
y
deﬁne by integration
ω(λ)
def
=
∫
λ
ω; η(λ)
def
=
∫
λ
η
(for λ ∈ Λ) a basis of F = HomZ(Λ,C)=Λ C (where we use the fact that the cup pairing
on cohomology deﬁnes a natural isomorphism of Λ with its dual). Thus, in particular, we
can write
H ∼= (C · ω) ⊕ (C · η)
Moreover, although ω and η depend on the choice of isomorphism ω
E ∼= C, this decompo-
sition does not. Thus, we get a natural splitting
κη : τE →H
66

of the exact sequence 0 → ωE →H→ τE → 0 (cf. the discussion preceding Proposition
1.3). Here, we shall often think of τE and H as the universal covering spaces ofE and E† ,
respectively.
Deﬁnition 3.4. We shall refer to κη as the η-splitting of H→ τE.
Remark. The relationship of this splitting with the theory of this paper is as follows:
In [Katz], Appendix C, §C2, a certain natural algebraic rational section of the universal
extension is constructed. This section will be discussed from the point of view of the present
paper in §4 below. It is then shown in [Katz], Appendix C, §C6, that the Weierstrass ζ-
function may be thought of as the diﬀerence between this algebraic rational section and
the splitting of Deﬁnition 3.4 . On the other hand, in the present paper, we will consider
(cf. §5 below) the diﬀerence between this algebraic rational section and the splitting of
Theorem 2.1. This diﬀerence will play an important role in the theory of the present
Chapter. Moreover, we would like to think of this diﬀerence – which we will refer to as
the Schottky-Weierstrass ζ-function –a sb e i n ganalogous to the classical Weierstrass ζ-
function. In fact, we shall see below in §5 that many of the important properties of the
Schottky-Weierstrass ζ-function are proven by arguments exactly analogous to those used
to prove the basic properties of the classical Weierstrass ζ-function. The reason for the
inclusion of the word “Schottky” here is that this “Schottky-Weierstrass ζ-function” is a
sort of Weierstrass ζ-function with respect to the Schottky uniformization G
m → E of E
(cf. the discussion surrounding Deﬁnition 3.3 above).
§4. Hodge-Theoretic Interpretation of the Universal Extension
In this §, we show how to interpret the universal extension as theHodge-theoretic ﬁrst
Chern class of a certain divisor . The material of this § follows immediately from (the
obvious logarithmic generalization of) [Falt], Lemma IV.4, but, for the convenience of the
reader, we give a self-contained treatment here. In particular, the theory of the present §
will allow us to give a functorial deﬁnition of the splitting of [Katz], Lemma C2.1, which
will play an important role in §5 below. In [Katz], by contrast, only an explicit deﬁnition
of this splitting in terms of certain “special functions” was given, without any explanation
of its functorial deﬁnition. In fact, for proving the results of §5 below, it will be important
to know the deﬁnition of this splitting in terms of special functions, but nonetheless it is
interesting to know that this splitting can be deﬁned by means of abstract nonsense.
Let C
log → Slog be a log elliptic curve. Let
π1,π2 : C ×S E → E
be the projections to the ﬁrst and second factors, and denote by E =Δ E ⊆ E ×S E ⊆
C ×S E the diagonal section. (Thus, Δ E is a (closed) divisor in C ×S E.) Let
67

Z → C ×S E
be the torsor of relative logarithmic diﬀerentials (i.e., diﬀerentials with respect to the
logarithmic morphism πlog
2 : Clog ×Slog Elog → Elog) that are regular everywhere, except
at the divisor Δ E, where they have a simple pole with residue 1. Thus, Z is an ωE |C×SE-
torsor (where we think of the diﬀerentials “ωE” as arising from the ﬁrst factor of C ×S E)
on C ×S E. Another way to think ofZ is that it is the torsor deﬁned by theHodge-theoretic
ﬁrst Chern class in
R1(π2)∗(C ×S E,ω E |C×SE)
of the divisor ΔE.
Similarly, let
Y → C ×S E
be the torsor of relative logarithmic diﬀerentials (i.e., diﬀerentials with respect to the
logarithmic morphism πlog
2 : Clog ×Slog Elog → Elog) that are regular everywhere, except at
the divisor {e}× E ⊆ C ×S E, where they have a simple pole with residue 1. (Here, “ e”
denotes the origin of E.) Thus, Y is an ωE |C×SE-torsor on C ×S E. Another way to think
of Z is that it is the torsor deﬁned by the Hodge-theoretic ﬁrst Chern class in
R1(π2)∗(C ×S E,ω E |C×SE)
of the divisor {e}× E ⊆ C ×S E. Note that in fact, Y is the pull-back to C ×S E via π1
of the torsor
Tor → C
which is the Hodge-theoretic ﬁrst Chern class of the divisor {e} in C.
Let us denote by
ZΔ → E; YΔ → E
the restrictions of the torsors Z and Y to Δ E ⊆ C ×S E.T h u s ,ZΔ and YΔ are ωE |E-
torsors on E. Since the composite of E =Δ E ↪→ C ×S E with π1 is the natural inclusion
E↪ → C, it follows that
YΔ = Tor|E
68

i.e., the torsor associated to the Hodge-theoretic ﬁrst Chern class of the divisor {e} in C.
On the other hand, we propose to show in the following that when 2 is invertible on
S,t h et o r s o rZΔ is trivial, and, moreover that one can construct an explicit trivialization
of ZΔ :L e t J be the sheaf of ideals on C ×S E that deﬁnes Δ E.T h e nw eh a v ea ne x a c t
sequence
0 →J 2/J3 →J /J3 →J /J2 → 0
We will regard this exact sequence as an exact sequence of OE-modules via the action of
OE arising from the second factor of C ×S E. We would ﬁrst like to show that this exact
sequence (of OE-modules) admits a natural splitting when 2 is invertible on S.
We construct this splitting as follows: First, observe that the isomorphism
C ×S E ∼= C ×S E
given by (α,β) ↦→ (α−β,β)( w h e r eα is a point ofC, β a point ofE, and we use the fact that
the group schemeE acts on C)m a p sΔE ⊆ C ×S E isomorphically onto {e}× E ⊆ C ×S E.
Thus, if Ie ⊆ C is the sheaf of ideals deﬁning {e}⊆ C, then we have an exact sequence of
sheaves
0 →I 2
e /I3
e →I e/I3
e →I e/I2
e → 0
of OS-modules such that the exact sequence of the preceding paragraph is the pull-back
via π1 : C ×S E → C of this exact sequence. Thus, it suﬃces to construct a splitting of
this exact sequence. To do this, we consider the automorphism “−1” onE, which extends
to an automorphism of C. This automorphism induces an automorphism α of the above
exact sequence (which covers the automorphism “−1” ofC). Moreover, the automorphism
α is of order 2, and (as one sees easily by identifying Ie/I2
e with the cotangent space ωE
to C at e) induces multiplication by −1 (respectively, 1) on Ie/I2
e (respectively, I2
e /I3
e ).
Thus, the endomorphism 1
2 · (1 − α) of the above exact sequence induces a splitting of the
above exact sequence, as desired.
Thus, we obtain a splitting
SJ : J /J2 →J /J3
of the exact sequence
0 →J 2/J3 →J /J3 →J /J2 → 0
Now let s be a local section of J /J2 in a (Zariski) neighborhood of ΔE.T h e nSJ (s) lifts
(noncanonically) to a local section t of J with a zero of order 1 at Δ E.T h u s ,i fw ef o r m
69

the logarithmic derivative dt
t of t (where we diﬀerentiate with respect to the ﬁrst factor
of C ×S E), we get a diﬀerential which is regular in a neighborhood of ΔE, except that it
has a simple pole at Δ E with a residue of order 1. Thus, dt
t deﬁnes a section of Z over
this neighborhood. Moreover, one checks immediately that the restriction of this section
to Δ E is independent of the choice of s and t. Thus, we get a section
SΔ : E → ZΔ
of ZΔ which is globally deﬁned over E. That is to say, we have proven the following:
Proposition 4.1. If 2 is invertible on S, then the torsor ZΔ → E admits a canonical
section SΔ : E → ZΔ (as deﬁned above).
Next, let us observe that it follows from the deﬁnition of the universal extension E†
in §1 that the torsor
Z − Y
formed by taking the diﬀerence of the torsorsY and Z on C ×S E is trivial on the ﬁbers of
π2 : C ×S E → E, and, moreover, that the torsorZ − Y may thus be “pushed forward” via
π2 to form an ωE-torsor on E which is (by deﬁnition) equal to E† → E. In fact, because
Z − Y is trivial on the ﬁbers of π2, it is in fact equal to the pull-back by π2 of the torsor
E† → E. In particular, since the composite of E =Δ E ↪→ C ×S E with π2 is the identity,
it follows that we have a natural equality of ωE-torsors on E:
ZΔ − YΔ =( Z − Y )|Δ E = E†
Thus, by Proposition 4.1, we obtain that:
Theorem 4.2. If 2 is invertible on S, then there is a canonical isomorphism of ωE-
torsors on E
E† ∼= −Tor|E
between E† → E and −1 times the torsor associated to the Hodge-theoretic ﬁrst Chern
class of the origin {e}⊆ E.
Next, we would like to observe a certain consequence of Proposition 4.2:
70

Corollary 4.3. Even if 2 is not invertible on S,t h e ωE |E-torsor E† → E extends
naturally to an ωE |C-torsor E†
C → C.I f Slog =( M
log
1,0)Z, then this extension is unique.
Proof. We begin with the case where 2 is invertible. Then Theorem 4.2 implies that
E† → E is isomorphic −Tor|E, which is just the restriction to E ⊆ C of the torsor
−Tor → C.T h i sp r o v e sextendability.
Next, we prove uniqueness in the case where Slog =( M
log
1,0)Z.W r i t eDS ⊆ S for the
divisor at inﬁnity, and DC ⊆ C for the complement of E in C with the “reduced induced”
scheme structure. Thus, DC maps isomorphically down to DS,a n dDC ∼= DS ∼= Spec(Z).
Uniqueness then follows from the fact that DC has codimension 2i n C (which is a regular
algebraic stack).
Thus, it remains to prove extendability in the case where Slog =( M
log
1,0)Z. Note that
(relative to the notation introduced in the preceding paragraph) there is a natural exact
sequence of “local cohomology groups”:
... → H
1(C,ωE |C) → H1(E,ω E |E) → H2
DC (C,ωE |C) → ...
where H2
DC denotes “cohomology with supports in DC.” On the other hand, it is well-
known that since the subschemeDC ⊆ C is a local complete intersection of codimension2,
the cohomology module H2
DC is ﬂat over Z. (Indeed, this amounts to a well-known compu-
tation involving the Koszul complex (cf., e.g., [Mats]): If t1 and t2 are local parameters on
S at DC, then this cohomology is a direct limit ofZ-modules of the form Z[t1,t2]/(tn
1 ,tn
2
),
as n →∞ .) Thus, it follows that the vanishing of the obstruction to extending E† to C
may be checked after restriction to Spec(Z[1
2 ]). This completes the proof of the corollary.
⃝
Remark. The reader may ﬁnd it strange that despite the fact that we have shown the
torsors E†
C → C and −Tor → C to be isomorphic after one inverts 2, we may not conclude
immediately that they are isomorphic even without inverting 2. The reason for this is the
possibility of the existence of 2-torsion in H1(S, ωE). In fact, we shall see later that the
isomorphism between E†
C → C and −Tor → C does, in fact, fail to be integral at the prime
2 (cf. the Remark following Corollary 5.8).
Note that Corollary 4.3 thus implies that the vector bundle T considered in the dis-
cussion preceding Deﬁnition 2.3 extends naturally to a vector bundle TC on C that ﬁts
into an exact sequence
0 →O C →T C → τE |C → 0
extending the exact sequence of loc. cit.
71

Finally, we make the connection with thesplitting of [Katz], Lemma C2.1.T h e p o i n t i s
the following: The torsor−Tor → C is the torsor of diﬀerentials that are regular everywhere
except for a simple pole at the origin of residue −1. Thus, over
U
def
= C −{ e}
this torsor is just the torsor of global regular diﬀerentials. In particular, overU,i ta d m i t s
a section given by the “zero diﬀerential.” Moreover, in a neighborhood of e, it is easy to
see that the zero diﬀerential,regarded as the sort of diﬀerential parametrized by−Tor,h a s
ap o l eo fo r d e r1a te. Thus, we get a section
Sor : U →− Tor
with a pole of order 1 at the origin.
Now let us assume that 6 is invertible on S. Then one obtains two sections
S1, S2 : U → E†
C
of the universal extension over U: the ﬁrst is given by transporting Sor by means of
the isomorphism of Theorem 4.2; the second is that of [Katz], Lemma C2.1. To review,
this section of [Katz] is deﬁned as follows: For an elliptic curve deﬁned by the equation
y
2 =4 x3 −g2x−g3, the sectionS2 is deﬁned by associating to a pointP of U the diﬀerential
y + y(P)
2{x − x(P)} · dx
y
(which is regular everywhere except at e and P, and has residues −1a t e and +1 at P).
In fact, strictly speaking, Katz only deﬁnes this section for smooth C → S, but one checks
easily that the above deﬁnition deﬁnes a section for arbitrary C.M o r e o v e r ,both sections
have a pole of order1 at e. Indeed, this follows immediately from the deﬁnition for S1;f o r
S2, it follows from, say, [Katz], Theorem C6, (2). Thus, their diﬀerence deﬁnes a section
δ∈ Γ(C,ωE |C(e))
We would like to show that δ = 0. To do this, it suﬃces to consider the universal case:
i.e., Slog = M
log
1,0 ⊗Z Z[1
6 ]. Then it follows immediately from an elementary application of
Riemann-Roch on the ﬁbers of C → S that δ in fact lies in Γ(C,ωE |C)=Γ ( S, ωE). On
the other hand, it is well-known (cf., e.g., [KM], p. 227) that Γ( S, ωE) = 0. Thus, δ=0 ,
as desired. In other words, we have proven the following result:
Corollary 4.4. Suppose that 6 is invertible on S. Then the isomorphism −Tor ∼= E†
C
maps the section Sor : C −{ e}→− Tor deﬁned above to the section of[Katz], Lemma C2.1.
72

In particular, the section of[Katz], Lemma C2.1, deﬁnes a unique section C −{ e}→ E†
C,
even when 6 is not invertible.
§5. Analytic Continuation of the Canonical Splitting
The purpose of this § is to show that the canonical splitting κ of Theorem 2.1 may
be “analytically continued” to a splitting in the category of “entire functions” on the uni-
formization of a degenerating elliptic curve in the sense of [Mumf](i.e., the formal algebraic
analogue of the Schottky uniformization). Although this splitting will not be periodic, it
will satisfy a simple rule with respect to the period of the degenerating elliptic curve (i.e.,
shifting by a period aﬀects the splitting by adding a constant). In order to analyze this
splitting, we will also use the splitting S
or of Corollary 4.4. The diﬀerence between κ
and Sor will be a sort of Weierstrass ζ-function with respect to the Schottky uniformiza-
tion. Thus, we will refer to it as a Schottky-Weierstrass ζ-function. We will discuss this
ζ-function (as well as its “close relatives”) in more detail in §6, 7 below. In the present §,
we show how to translate the material of [Katz], Appendix C, §C6, C7 into the context of
Mumford’s construction. Although, strictly speaking, this Schottky version of the theory
of [Katz], Appendix C, §C6, C7, is not logically necessary for the proofs of the main results
of the present § (or, for that matter, of the present paper), we present it here nevertheless
because we feel it to be both interesting and generally culturally relevant to what we do
discuss here. Also, we remark that “in principle,” what we discuss here is “well-known,”
but I do not know an adequate reference for it.
We begin by reviewing the set-up in [Mumf] , especially [Mumf], §5. To do this, we
must introduce some notation. Let K be a ﬁnite extension of Q,a n dl e tO
K be its ring
of integers.I nt h i s§,w el e t
O
be a Zariski localization of OK, i.e., a ring such that Spec( O) is an open subscheme of
Spec(OK). Let
A
def
= O[[q]]; S
def
=S p e c (A)
(where q is an indeterminate). Moreover, we equip S with the log structure deﬁned by the
divisor D
def
= V (q) ⊆ S.L e t ˆS be the formal scheme obtained by regarding O[[q]] as a
topological ring with the q-adic topology. Let
E → S
73

be the semi-abelian scheme obtain by forming the quotient of Gm by the period “ q”( a s
in [Mumf] or [FC], Chapter III). Then E → S arises in a natural way from a log elliptic
curve Clog → Slog.L e tu sw r i t e
LC
def
= OC(e); LE
def
= LC |E
(where e is the divisor deﬁned by the identity section).
Next, we would like to consider various kinds of analytic functions. First, recall that
we have a natural identiﬁcation
EˆS =( Gm)ˆS
Let us write Ran
E for the coordinate ring of EˆS. Thus, one can think of Ran
E as:
Ran
E = A{{U, U−1}}
i.e., Laurent series with coeﬃcients converging to zero in A.L e tu sw r i t e
Ralg
E ⊆R an
E [θ]; (respectively , R′
E ⊆R an
E
[θ])
where θ is an indeterminate, for the A-subalgebra of Ran
E [θ] generated (respectively, gen-
erated q-adically) by the elements
{qk2+k · U2k+1 · θ,qk2
· U2k · θ,qk2−k · U2k−1 · θ}
where k ranges over all elements ofZ.T h a t i s t o s a y ,Ralg
E (along with itsq-adic completion
R′
E) is the ring “Rφ,Σ” used by Mumford (cf. [Mumf], p. 306) to constructE as a quotient
of Gm. In this context, it is natural to think of Ran
E [θ], Ralg
E and R′
E as graded rings,i n
which elements of Ran
E have degree zero and θhas degree one.
Next, recall from the theory of [Mumf] that there is a natural action of Z on
C∞ def
=P r o j (Ralg
E )a n d C∞
ˆS
def
=P r o j (R′
E)
deﬁned by letting 1 ∈ Z act by:
U ↦→ q · U; θ ↦→ q · U2 · θ
In the following, we shall denote this group of automorphisms by
Zet
74

Thus, we shall identify the elements ofZet with Z and write, for instance, “1et ∈ Zet,” but
we prefer to use the notation Zet for the group of automorphisms, in order to distinguish
it from, for instance, Z regarded as a subring of O.
Now it follows from the theory of [Mumf] that in our notationCˆS is formed by taking
the quotient of C∞
ˆS
by this action of Zet. In fact, the special ﬁber
(C∞ )spl =( C∞
ˆS )spl
(i.e., ﬁber over V (q) ⊆ S)o f C∞ is an inﬁnite chain of P1’s, connected to each other at
“0” and “ ∞ .” Thus, each irreducible component of ( C∞ )spl is a copy P1, labeled by an
element of Zet. The action of Zet on the irreducible components (thought of relative to
this labeling) is just the action of Zet on Zet by addition. (See [Mumf] for more details.)
Another way to think ofC∞ is as a sort ofN´eron modelfor Gm over S relative to the open
immersion S − V (q) ⊆ S. Thus, the irreducible components of the special ﬁber correspond
naturally to the q-adic orders of elements of A[q−1].
Relative to the point of view of [Mumf] (cf. especially [Mumf], p. 289), the ample line
bundle “O(1)” onC∞
ˆS
obtained by regardingR′
E as a graded ring (as discussed above) may
be identiﬁed in a natural fashion with the pull-back (relative to the quotient C∞
ˆS
→ CˆS)
L⊗2
C∞
ˆS
to C∞
ˆS
of L⊗2
C .T h u s , t h e e l e m e n t s o fR′
E of degree i deﬁne sections of L⊗2i
C∞
ˆS
over C∞
ˆS
.
Conversely, I claim that all sections of L⊗2i
C∞
ˆS
over C∞
ˆS
arise in this way. Indeed, it suﬃces
to note that:
(1) The global sections of L⊗2i
C∞
ˆS
over the irreducible component of (C∞ )spl
marked “0” are spanned over O by the restrictions to this irreducible
component of the sections
U −i · θi,U −i+1 · θi,... ,θi,U i−1 · θi,U i · θi
(2) The sections
U −i+1 · θi,U −i+2 · θi,... ,θi,U i−1 · θi,U i · θi
all vanish when restricted to any irreducible component of (C∞ )spl that
lies on the same side of the component marked 0 as the point U =0o f
75

the components marked 0. (Indeed, acting on any of these sections by
a positive integer ∈ Zet sends these sections to zero modulo q.)
By translating these two observations over to the other irreducible components of C∞ spl,
one sees easily that one may construct arbitrary sections ofL⊗2i
(C∞ )spl
over (C∞ )spl by means
of elements in R′
E. This completes the proof of the claim. Thus, in summary,
Γ(C∞
ˆS , L⊗2i
C∞
ˆS
)=d e g r e ei portion of R′
E
Put another way, θ deﬁnes a trivialization of the line bundle L⊗2
C∞
ˆS
over EˆS =( Gm)ˆS
with respect to which global sections may be written as certain Laurent series inU whose
coeﬃcients ( ∈ A) decay fairly rapidly.
In particular, suppose that σalg ∈ Γ(C, LC) is the section given by the embedding
OC ↪→O C(e)= LC. Then, by restricting σalg to C∞
ˆS
, we can write its square ( σalg)2
analytically as some element
(σalg)2|C∞
ˆS
=( σan)2 · θ ∈R ′
E
where (σan)2 ∈R an
E is some (topological) A-linear combination of the elements
{qk2+k · U2k+1,q k2
· U2k,q k2 −k · U2k−1}{k∈Z}
The advantage of working with (σan)2 is that it is an explicit Laurent series. For conve-
nience, in the following, we shall often write just σ2 for (σan)2. In terms of normalizations
of σalg (relative to multiplication by elements of A×), we would like to think of σalg as
being chosen so that the square diﬀerential at the origin e of E determined by σ2 (which
has a zero of order 2 at the origin) is equal to (d log(U))2.
Next, let
Rmer
C∞
ˆS
denote the ring ofmeromorphic functions on C∞
ˆS
. By this, we mean those functions which
can, Zariski locally on the formal schemeC∞
ˆS
, be written as a quotient of a regular function
(i.e., a section of OC∞
ˆS
) by a nonzero regular function. Thus, the zeroes and poles of a
meromorphic function on C∞
ˆS
have ﬁnite order . Note, further, that we have a natural
injection
Rmer
C∞
ˆS
↪→ Q(Ran
E )
76

(where “ Q” denotes “the quotient ﬁeld of”). Indeed, the fact that this morphism is an
injection follows by considering the situation at the nodes of C∞
ˆS
, where this injectivity
essentially amounts to the fact that the natural map
O[[X,Y ]] → (O[[X]](X−1))[[Y ]]
(where X and Y are indeterminates) from power series overO in X and Y to power series
in Y with coeﬃcients in O[[X]](X−1) is injective.
Observe that iff is a function onC∞
ˆS
which can be written as a quotient of a (regular)
section of L⊗2N over C∞
ˆS
by a nonzero (regular) section of L⊗2N over C∞
ˆS
(for some N),
then
f ∈R mer
C∞
ˆS
For instance, since both θ (̸=0 )a n dσ2 · θ are regular sections of L2 over C∞
ˆS
, it follows
that
σ2 =( σ2 · θ) · θ−1 ∈R mer
C∞
ˆS
Finally, if φ ∈R mer
C∞
ˆS
,l e tu sw r i t e
φ′ def
= U ∂φ
∂U
Note that since φ ∈R mer
C∞
ˆS
,w ea l s oh a v eφ′ ∈R mer
C∞
ˆS
.
Next, we would like to make use of the Weierstrass normal form of the elliptic curve
E (as in [Katz], §C2). That is to say, we ﬁx the diﬀerential
d log(U)= dU
U
and take the resulting rational functions x and y on E such that dx/y = d log(U)( a si n
[Katz], §C2). Thus, the elliptic curve E is deﬁned by the equation
y2 =4 x3 − g2x − g3
where the zero sectione is the point at inﬁnity (of the aﬃne curve deﬁne by this equation).
In order to do this, one must assume that 6−1 ∈O .T h u s ,for the rest of this§, until stated
otherwise, we shall assume that 6−1 ∈O . (We will state explicitly (after Proposition 4.5)
when this assumption is no longer in force.)
77

Thus, x is a rational function on C with the following properties:
(i) x has a pole of order two at the origin, and no other poles;
(ii) x is even;
(iii) the section of τ⊗2
E deﬁned by looking at the “leading term” of x at
the origin is equal to (U ∂
∂U )2.
Moreover, y is the rational function on C given by U ∂x
∂U . (Note that since the derivation
U ∂
∂U is algebraic, this statement makes sense in the algebraic category despite the fact
that “ U” is only deﬁned analytically.) Then, by analogy with the classical complex theory
(see, e.g., [Ahlf], p. 272), we write
℘ and ℘′
for the analytic representations (i.e., elements of Rmer
C∞
ˆS
) of x and y, respectively. Also, we
write
ζ
def
=( σ2)′/(2 · σ2) ∈R mer
C∞
ˆS
for the analogue of the classical Weierstrass ζ-function. Note that since σ2 is even, while
U ∂
∂U is odd, it follows that ζ is an odd function. Also, note that since σ2 has a zero of
order 2 at the origin e, it follows that ζ· d log(U) has a simple pole at the origin e whose
residue is 1. In fact, modulo q, it is easy to compute ζ explicitly: Indeed, modulo q, σ2 is
equal to a unit multiple ofU − 2+ U −1 (compare zero loci!), so we obtain that (moduloq)
ζ· d log(U) ≡ 1
2 · d log(U − 2+ U −1)= dU
U − 1 − 1
2d log(U)=
{ U
U − 1 − 1
2
}
· d log(U)
In particular, we see that the meromorphic functionζis regular (i.e., does not have a pole)
at the nodes U =0 , ∞ of the component of (C∞
ˆS
)spl marked 0.
Note that t h ea c t i o no fZet on ζ may be determined as follows: 1 et ∈ Zet acts on θ
by:
θ ↦→ q · U2 · θ
Since σ2 · θis pulled back from CˆS, it thus follows that 1et ∈ Zet ﬁxes σ2 · θ.I np a r t i c u l a r ,
the action of 1et ∈ Zet on σ2 is given by:
78

σ2 ↦→ q−1 · U −2 · σ2
This allows us to conclude that the action of 1et ∈ Zet on 1
2 times the logarithmic derivative
of σ2, i.e., on ζ,i sg i v e nb y :
ζ ↦→ ζ− 1
Observe that this shows, in particular, that ζ is regular except at the orbit
˜e
def
= Zet(e) ⊆ C∞
ˆS
of e under the action of Zet, where it is has a pole of order one.
Next, we would like to check that certain classical formulas concerning the various
functions just deﬁned hold in the present context, as well. First of all, let us observe that
the general nonsense concerning meromorphic functions on C
∞
ˆS
can be extended to the
product C∞
ˆS
×ˆS C∞
ˆS
, as well. We leave the formulation of this general nonsense to the
r e a d e r .N o wl e tu sw r i t e
μ, π1,π2 : EˆS ×ˆS EˆS → EˆS
for the obvious multiplication and projection maps, respectively. Write
ν : EˆS ×ˆS EˆS → EˆS
for the map given by (α,β) ↦→ α− β. Then we have the followinganalogue of a well-known
classical formula:
Proposition 5.1. One has an equality
(−π∗
1℘ + π∗
2℘)2 = (μ∗σ2) · (ν∗σ2)
(π∗
1σ4) · (π∗
2σ4)
of meromorphic functions on C∞
ˆS
×ˆS C∞
ˆS
.
Proof. The proof is entirely similar to that in the classical case. Namely, one uses the
cubical structure on L
def
= LC |EˆS
to ﬁrst deduce the corresponding (natural) isomorphism
of line bundles: Indeed, if
79

B
def
=( μ∗L) ⊗ (π∗
1 L)−1 ⊗ (π∗
2 L)−1
is the corresponding Gm-biextension on the E ×S E (cf. [MB] for more on cubical struc-
tures), then one has a natural isomorphism
OE×SE ∼= B⊗
(
idE × (−idE)
)∗
B
=( μ∗L) ⊗ (ν∗L) ⊗ (π∗
1 L)⊗−2 ⊗ (π∗
2 L)⊗−2
Taking the “square” of this isomorphism shows that both sides of the desired equality can
be naturally (i.e., algebraically without enlisting the aid of the trivializationθ) regarded as
rational functions on E ×S E. Note that here, we use the fact that the trivialization θ is
compatible with the cubical structure onL (which follows from the theory of [Mumf]; [FC],
Chapter III). Next, observe that since ℘ is an even function, the left-hand side has zeroes
of order 2 atμ−1(e)a n dν−1(e). Moreover, the left-hand side has poles only atπ−1
1 (e)a n d
π−1
2 (e), and these poles are both of order 4. Since this enumeration exhausts all the poles
and zeroes of the right-hand side, we thus conclude that the desired equality holds up to
muliplication by a unit of A. In fact, for our purposes, this will be suﬃcient, but one can
check that this unit must be = 1 be looking at the leading term at the origin. ⃝
Proposition 5.2. One has an equality
1
2
π∗
1℘′ − π∗
2℘′
π∗
1℘ − π∗
2℘ =( μ∗ζ) − (π∗
1ζ) − (π∗
2ζ)
of meromorphic functions on C∞
ˆS
×ˆS C∞
ˆS
.
Proof. The proof is entirely similar to that in the classical case: Namely, one takes the
logarithmic derivative of both sides of the equality of Proposition 5.1 with respect to the
derivation π
∗
1(U ∂
∂U )+ π∗
2(U ∂
∂U ), and then divides by 4. Note here that the push-forward
of this derivation with respect to μ (respectively, ν) is equal to 2 · (U ∂
∂U ) (respectively, 0).
⃝
Next, we would like to prove the analogue of Theorem C6 of [Katz] . The analogue
of the ﬁrst part of this theorem (i.e., Theorem C6, (1)) consists of making explicit the
diﬀerentials deﬁned by the canonical splitting in terms of the special function ζ. Recall
that over D, we already did this (i.e., wrote down the diﬀerential “ ωx” explicitly) in our
construction of κ (cf. the discussion preceding Theorem 2.1). Thus, we would like to
extend this discussion to the situation over ˆS.
To do this, let α ∈ Gm( ˆS)b eap o i n to fEˆS.W r i t e
80

Tα : EˆS → EˆS
for the morphism given by translating by α. Then let us consider the diﬀerential (on EˆS)
deﬁned by
ωα
def
=
(
T ∗
α−1 (ζ) − ζ
)
· d log(U)
Note that since ζ · d log(U) has a simple pole with residue 1 at e, the diﬀerential ωα
has a simple pole with residue 1 (respectively, −1) at α (respectively, e). Clearly, the
correspondence α ↦→ ωα is functorial in α. Moreover, we have the following
Lemma 5.3. The diﬀerentialωα is algebraic in the sense that it arises from a meromor-
phic diﬀerential on C. Moreover, this meromorphic diﬀerential on C has no poles except
at α and e.
Proof. Indeed, 1et ∈ Zet acts on both ζ and its translate T ∗
α−1 (ζ) by adding −1. Thus,
1et ∈ Zet stabilizes ωα. This implies that ωα descends to an algebraic meromorpic diﬀer-
ential on C. The description of the poles of ωα follows from the description of the poles of
ζ given in the above discussion. ⃝
Next, let us observe that (for α,β ∈ Gm( ˆS)= EˆS( ˆS)) the meromorphic function
(T ∗
α−1 σ2) · (T ∗
β−1 σ2)
(T ∗
α−1 ·β−1 σ2) · σ2
on C∞
ˆS
is “algebraic,” i.e., arises from a meromorphic function on E. This follows imme-
diately (cf. the use of cubical structures in the proof of Proposition 5.1) from the fact that
the corresponding line bundle
(T ∗
α−1 L) ⊗ (T ∗
β−1 L) ⊗ (T ∗
α−1 ·β−1 L)−1 ⊗L −1
(and hence also its square) is trivial. On the other hand, if we then take the logarithmic
derivative of this rational function (with respect to the derivation U ∂
∂U ) and multiply by
1
2 · d log(U), we obtain
ωα + ωβ − ωα·β
This implies (cf. the discussion preceding Theorem 2.1) that the correspondence α ↦→ ωα
deﬁnes a homomorphism of EˆS into E†
ˆS
. By the uniqueness statement in Theorem 2.1, we
thus conclude the following Schottky analogue of [Katz], Theorem C6, (1):
81

Theorem 5.4. The splitting κ : EˆS → E†
ˆS
of Theorem 2.1 is the splitting deﬁned by the
correspondence
α ↦→ ωα
def
=
(
T ∗
α−1 (ζ) − ζ
)
· d log(U)
for α ∈ EˆS( ˆS).
Next, we would like to move on to proving the analogue of thesecond part of Theorem
C6 of [Katz]. First, let us recall the exact sequence
0 →O C →T C → τE |C → 0
considered in the discussion following Corollary 4.3. If we tensor this exact sequence with
ωE ⊗OS L⊗2
C , we obtain an exact sequence
0 → ωE ⊗L ⊗2
C →T ′ →L ⊗2
C → 0
Now let us recall the section
Sor : C − e →− Tor ∼= E†
C
of Corollary 4.4. Since this section has a pole of order precisely 1 ( ≤ 2) at e, it follows
from the deﬁnition of TC that it deﬁnes a lifting
ξalg ∈ Γ(C, T ′)
of the section (σalg)2 ∈ Γ(E, L⊗2
E ). Now let us writeξalg in terms of itscomponents relative
to the canonical splitting (cf. Deﬁnition 2.3):
(ξ[0] · θ,ξ[1] · θ)
(Here, by trivializing ωE by means of the section U ∂
∂U , we may regard ξ[0] as a function,
rather than just a section of ωE |EˆS
.) Thus, by deﬁnition,
ξ[1] = σ2
We would like to compute ξ[0]. In fact, one has the following:
Proposition 5.5. We have ξ[0] = 1
2 (σ2)′.
82

Proof. The proof of the equality ξ[0] = 1
2 (σ2)′ is entirely formally analogous to the
proof of the second part of [Katz], Theorem C6. Namely, it is a formal consequence of
Proposition 5.2. Indeed, if α ∈ EˆS( ˆS)= Gm( ˆS), then ξ[0] is the unique function such
that adding (σ−2 · ξ[0])(α) to the canonical splitting κ(α) of Theorem 2.1 gives rise to the
splitting Sor(α)o v e rα. But by Corollary 4.4 (and the explicit form of Sor in terms of x
and y reviewed in the discussion preceding Corollary 4.4), this splittingSor(α) corresponds
to the meromorphic diﬀerential
y + y(α)
2{x − x(α)} · d log(U)
while by Theorem 5.4, the meromorphic diﬀerential given by adding (σ−2 · ξ[0])(α)t ot h e
canonical splitting κ(α) of Theorem 2.1 is precisely
ωα +( σ−2 · ξ[0])(α) · d log(U)= {ζ(α−1 · U) − ζ(U)+ σ(α)−2(ξ[0])(α)}· d log(U)
Since y is an odd function, while x is even, it thus follows from Proposition 5.2 that these
two expressions are equal precisely when σ−2 · ξ[0] = ζ, i.e., ξ[0] = 1
2 (σ2)′, as desired. ⃝
Now let us recall thatζ= (σ2)′
2·σ2 deﬁnes a meromorphic function on C∞
ˆS
with a pole of
order 1 at the origin e. Next, note that since the meromorphic splitting Sor is deﬁned over
CˆS, its pull-back to C∞
ˆS
is a meromorphic splitting of E†
C |C∞
ˆS
over C∞
ˆS
which is regular
away from˜e. On the other hand, it follows from Proposition 5.5 that the canonical splitting
κ over EˆS is equal to the diﬀerence between Sor|EˆS
and ζ· d log(U)|EˆS
. Thus, it follows
that the canonical splitting κ extends to a meromorphic splitting of E†
C |C∞
ˆS
.
Next, let us observe that the natural action ofZet on C∞
ˆS
and E†
C |C∞
ˆS
ﬁxes Sor (since
Sor is obtained by pull-back from CˆS). The action of Zet on the meromorphic extension
over C∞
ˆS
of κ may thus be determined by looking at the action of Zet on the diﬀerence
between this meromorphic extension and Sor|C∞
ˆS
, i.e., the action ofZet on ζ. Moreover, as
computed above, the action of 1et ∈ Zet on ζ is given by:
ζ ↦→ ζ− 1
Thus, the action of 1 et ∈ Zet on the meromorphic extension of κ (which is, roughly
speaking, just “ Sor − ζ”) overC∞
ˆS
is given by:
κ ↦→ κ+ d log(U)
83

In particular, since we know that ζ and Sor|C∞
ˆS
are regular everywhere except ˜e, while κ
is regular at e ∈ EˆS( ˆS) ⊆ C∞
ˆS
( ˆS), we conclude that the meromorphic extension of κ over
C∞
ˆS
is, in fact, regular over all of C∞
ˆS
. In other words, we have proven the following:
Theorem 5.6. The canonical section κ of Theorem 2.1 extends to a (regular) section of
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
over C∞
ˆS
. By abuse of notation, we also denote this (unique) extension of κ by κ.
The action of 1et ∈ Zet on C∞
ˆS
induces the following action on κ:
κ ↦→ κ+ d log(U)
The diﬀerence between κ and the pull-back to C∞
ˆS
of the section Sor of Corollary 4.4 is
given by the function ζ
def
= (σ2)′
2·σ2 , which is meromorphic on C∞
ˆS
, and regular everywhere on
C∞
ˆS
except for a pole of order 1 on ˜e (the Zet-orbit of the origin of EˆS). The action of
1et ∈ Zet on ζ is given by ζ ↦→ ζ− 1. Finally, the section κ of E†
C |C∞
ˆS
may also be thought
of (relative to the isomorphism of Theorem 4.2) as ( − 1
2 times) the section associated to
the unique connection on L⊗2
C∞
ˆS
for which the section θ is horizontal.
Proof. It remains to prove the ﬁnal assertion concerning the connection. Let us denote
this connection by ∇.T h e n
∇(σ · θ)=2 · ζ· (σ · θ) · d log(U)
Since σ · θis nonzero everywhere on C∞
ˆS
except ˜e, it thus follows that the connection ∇ is
regular everywhere onC∞
ˆS
, except possibly at˜e. On the other hand, since 1et(θ)= q ·U2 ·θ,
it follows that 1et(∇)= ∇− 2; hence that ∇ (which we know to be regular at e)i sa l s o
regular over all of ˜e, hence over all ofC∞
ˆS
.T h u s ,∇ deﬁnes a regular section κ∇ of E†
C |C∞
ˆS
which satisﬁes 1 et(κ∇ )= κ∇ +1 . I np a r t i c u l a r ,κ − κ∇ ∈ Γ(C∞
ˆS
,ωE |C∞
ˆS
)= ωE, i.e., the
diﬀerence κ − κ∇ is constant. Now we consider the automorphism α of C∞
ˆS
induced by
“multiplication by −1” onE. Note that since α(σ·θ)= σ·θ, the above formula for∇(σ·θ)
shows that α(∇)= ∇. Thus, (since the isomorphism of Theorem 4.2 is compatible with
the automorphism α) we obtain that the diﬀerential κ − κ∇ ∈ ωE = A · d log(U)i sﬁ x e d
by α. On the other hand, since α(d log(U)) = −d log(U), this implies that κ− κ∇ =0 ,a s
desired. ⃝
84

Corollary 5.7. The canonical section κ induces an isomorphism:
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
∼= WˆS ×ˆS C∞
ˆS
(where WˆS is the geometric object corresponding to the line bundle ωE |ˆS on the formal
scheme ˆS). Moreover, relative to this isomorphism, the quotientE†
C |C∞
ˆS
→ E†
C is given by
the action of Zet on W ×S C∞
ˆS
deﬁned by taking the product of the usual action of Zet on
C∞
ˆS
with the action of Zet on W given by letting 1 act as addition by d log(U).
Corollary 5.8. The components (cf. Deﬁnition 2.3) of any section ∈ Γ(E†
C, L⊗2i
C |
E†
C
)
with respect to the canonical splittingκ of Theorem 2.1 form elements of R′
E of degree i.
Remark. Note that the assertions of Theorem 5.6 and Corollaries 5.7, 5.8 may be checked
after inverting 6, so in fact, these results are all valid even if one does not invert 6. On
the other hand, as computed above, modulo q,w eh a v e :
ζ ≡ 1
2 · d log(U − 2+ U −1)= dU
U − 1 − 1
2d log(U)
i.e., ζ itself fails to be integral at the prime 2. Since the sections κ (cf. Theorem 2.1) and
Sor (cf. the discussion preceding Corollary 4.4) are integral at 2, and ζ is precisely the
diﬀerence between these two sections relative to the isomorphism of Theorem 4.2,i tt h u s
follows that the isomorphism between E†
C → C and −Tor → C (cf. Theorem 4.2) is not
integral at 2.
Finally, before proceeding, we apply the theory developed thus far to obtain explicit
information concerning liftings of torsion points of E to E† (cf. Remark 1 following
Deﬁnition 3.2). First, observe that since EˆS is essentially obtained by dividing Gm by
the action of Zet obtained by multiplying Gm powers of the period q, it follows that the
inverse images of the torsion points of EˆS in C∞
ˆS
are the points the form:
α · qβ ∈ Gm(A[qβ,q −1]) = C∞ (A[qβ]) = C∞
ˆS (A[qβ])
where “ Gm(∼ [q−1]) = C∞ (∼)” follows from the “N´eron model-like” property of C∞ ,
referred to earlier; α is a root of unity ∈ A;a n dβ ∈ Q. On the other hand, by Corollary
5.7, E†
ˆS
is essentially obtained by dividing the abelian object by W × Gm by the action
of Zet obtained by adding/multiplying multiples of the element ( d log(U),q ). We thus
conclude the following:
85

Corollary 5.9. Relative to the isomorphism
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
∼= WˆS ×ˆS C∞
ˆS
of Corollary 5.7, the inverse images of the torsion points of E† are precisely the points
whose coordinates (on the right-hand side of the above isomorphism) are given by
(β · d log(U),α · qβ)
where α is a root of unity ∈ A×;a n dβ ∈ Q.
Thus, in particular, torsion points of order N will, in general, have coordinates with
denominator N.
§6. Higher Schottky-Weierstrass Zeta Functions
In this §, we deﬁne a new integral structure on the universal extension of a degen-
erating elliptic curve at ﬁnite primes. Using this new integral structure, we construct
“higher” analogues of the Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functionconsidered in §5. These higher
Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functions (together with their twisted analogues, to be discussed
in Chapter IV) will play a fundamental role in this paper.
We work with the notation of §5. Thus, let O be a Zariski localization of OK,w h e r e
K is a ﬁnite extension of Q.L e t
A
def
= O[[q]]; S
def
=S p e c (A)
Then we have a one-dimensional semi-abelian scheme
E → S
over S. Roughly speaking, one may think of E as being “ Gm/qZ.” More rigorously, E
may be compactiﬁed to a log elliptic curve Clog → Slog.M o r e o v e r ,CˆS (the result of base
changing C to the q-adic completion ˆS of S) may be written as
CˆS = C∞
ˆS /Zet
Next, let us recall the contents of Theorem 5.6, and its corollaries. First of all, the
universal extension E† → E of E extends naturally (cf. Corollary 4.3) to a WE-torsor
86

E†
C → C. (Here, WE → S is the geometric line bundle deﬁned by the invertible sheaf ωE
on S, i.e., it is the object denoted “W”i n§2.) Then Theorem 5.6, Corollary 5.9 state that
we have a natural isomorphism
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
∼= (WE)ˆS ×ˆS C∞
ˆS
relative to which the quotient E†
C |C∞
ˆS
→ E†
C of the left-hand side corresponds to the
quotient by the subgroup generated by
(d log(U),q )
on the right-hand side. In the following, we shall identify E†
C |C∞
ˆS
with (WE)ˆS ×ˆS C∞
ˆS
via
this isomorphism. Moreover, (to simplify the notation) we shall trivialize ωE by means of
the section d log(U). Thus, we may write
WE =S p e c (OS[T])
(where T is the indeterminate corresponding to the chosen trivialization of ωE).
Next, let us write (for n ∈ Z≥0)
T[n] def
= 1
n!T(T − 1)(T − 2) · ... · (T − (n − 1))
which we think of as a section of OWE ⊗ Q. For negative n,w el e tT[n] def
=0 .T h u s ,w e
have
T[0] =1 ; T[1] = T; T[2] = 1
2T(T − 1)
Also, if f(T) is a section of OWE ⊗ Q,l e tu sw r i t ef(T + n) for the result of applying to
f(T) the automorphism of WE induced by net ∈ Zet, i.e., the automorphism deﬁned by
T ↦→ T + n. Thus, in particular, we may deﬁne:
δ(f)
def
= f(T +1 ) − f(T)
Then we have
δ(T[n])= T[n−1]
Now we are ready to deﬁne new integral structures. First of all, let us write
87

R
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
for the push-forward via E†
C |C∞
ˆS
→ C∞
ˆS
of the structure sheaf O
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
.T h e n w e w o u l d
like to deﬁne a new integral structure on R
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
⊗ Q as follows: By the above discussion,
the sheaf of algebras R
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
on C∞
ˆS
may be identiﬁed with
OC∞
ˆS
⊗OS OS[T]= OC∞
ˆS
⊗OS
( ⨁
n≥0
OS · Tn
)
Then the new integral structure will be given by the sheaf
OC∞
ˆS
⊗OS
( ⨁
n≥0
OS · T[n]
)
Let us denote by
Ret
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
⊆R
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
⊗ Q
the corresponding subsheaf of R
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
⊗ Q. Note that Ret
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
has a natural ﬁltration
... ⊆ Fn(Ret
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
) ⊆ ... ⊆R et
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
whose n-th member is given by the polynomials of degree <n .T h u s ,Fn(Ret
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
)i sa
vector bundle on C∞
ˆS
of rank n such that we have a natural identiﬁcation
(Fn+1/Fn)(Ret
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
)= 1
n! ·O C∞
ˆS
⊗OS τ⊗n
E
Moreover, let us observe that the ﬁltered OC∞
ˆS
-submodule Ret
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
⊆R
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
⊗ Q is
preserved by the natural action of Zet on C∞
ˆS
. Indeed, 1 et ∈ Zet maps f(T)
def
= T[n] to
88

f(T +1)= f(T)+ δ(f)= f(T)+ T[n−1].S i n c eT[n−1] also forms a section of Ret
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
,a n d
Ret
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
is an OC∞
ˆS
-module (hence closed under addition), we thus conclude thatRet
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
(as well as its ﬁltration) is stabilized by the action of Zet, as desired. We summarize this
as follows:
Proposition 6.1. The OC∞
ˆS
-submodules
... ⊆ Fn(Ret
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
) ⊆ ... ⊆R et
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
⊆R
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
⊗ Q
are all preserved by the natural action of Zet. Thus, they descend to form natural OC-
submodules
... ⊆ Fn(Ret
E†
C
) ⊆ ... ⊆R et
E†
C
⊆R
E†
C
⊗ Q
where the subsheaf Fn(Ret
E†
C
) of the ﬁltration is a rank n vector bundle on C such that
(Fn+1/Fn)(Ret
E†
C
)= 1
n! ·O C ⊗OS τ⊗n
E .
Proof. It remains only to check that the various sheaves that were constructed onC∞
ˆS
do
indeed descend to C. That is to say, since the covering C∞
ˆS
→ CˆS is inﬁnite ,t h er e a d e r
may fear that one cannot immediately apply the usual machinery of ´etale descent. In fact,
however, this is not a problem since CˆS admits a (ﬁnite) Zariski open cover {U } (in the
category of formal ˆS-schemes) such that over eachU, the covering C∞
ˆS
→ CˆS splits.T h u s ,
there is no problem with descent. ⃝
Deﬁnition 6.2. The integral structures denoted by a superscript “et” will be referred to
as ´etale-integral, or et-integral, structures. That is to say, “et” stands for “´etale,” and is
the same as the “et” in Zet. In particular, the “´etale-integral structure” may be thought
of as the integral structure arising from thinking of algebraic functions on the universal
extension as set-theoretic functions on Z
et, i.e., on the ﬁbers of the inﬁnite ´etale covering
C∞
ˆS
→ C∞
ˆS
/Zet = CˆS.
The original integral structure on the various “R’s” (i.e., the integral structures with-
out a label) will be referred to as thede Rham-integral, or DR-integral, structures.T h i si s
because they arise from the original natural integral structures on the universal extension
E† as a sort of de Rham cohomology – i.e., “ H1
DR(E, O×
E )” – associated to E.
89

Now we are ready to begin the construction of the higher Schottky-Weierstrass zeta
functions. In the following, we shall refer to polynomials
φrT[r] + φr−1T[r−1] +...+ φ0
(where r is a natural number) whose coeﬃcients φ0,... ,φr are meromorphic functions on
C∞
ˆS
as extension polynomials. One may also think of extension polynomials as meromor-
phic sections of Ret
E†
C
over C∞
ˆS
. We would like to consider those extension polynomials
which are invariant under the natural action of Zet, i.e., which descend to CˆS. Note that
since all OCˆS
-torsors on CˆS split as soon as one allows a pole of order 1 at the origin e,i t
follows that there exist Zet-invariant extension polynomials of the form:
T[r] + φr−1T[r−1] +...+ φ0
where φ0,... ,φr−1 are meromorphic on C∞
ˆS
, regular away from ˜e (the Zet-orbit of the
origin), and have a pole of order at most 1 at the points of˜e. For instance, the most basic
example (in the case where 2 ∈O ×) of such a polynomial is the polynomial
T + ζ
(where ζ is as in §5) studied in §5. Note that whereas 1et ∈ Zet acts on T by
T ↦→ T +1
it acts on ζ by ζ ↦→ ζ− 1. Thus, T + ζ is indeed Zet-invariant. In the following, we would
like to study the case of arbitrary r ≥ 1.
First, let us introduce some notation: If f is an extension polynomial, then let us
denote the result of acting on f by 1et ∈ Zet by means of the notation α(f). Let
δ(f)
def
= α(f) − f
This extends the deﬁnition of δgiven in the discussion preceding Proposition 1.1 (i.e., the
case of extension polynomials with constant coeﬃcients). Also, if f and g are extension
polynomials, then we have
δ(f · g)= δ(f) · α(g)+ f · δ(g)
Thus, to say that
90

f =
n∑
i=0
φn−i · T[i]
is Zet-invariant means precisely that
δ(f)=
n∑
i=0
δ(φn−i)(T[i] + T[i−1])+ φn−i · T[i−1] =0
i.e., that for all i,
δ(φn−i)+ δ(φn−i−1)+ φn−i−1 =0
(where we let φj
def
=0f o r j< 0, j>n ). Thus, we obtain the following:
Lemma 6.3. Let n be a nonnegative integer. Suppose that
f =
n∑
i=0
φn−i · T[i]
is a Zet-invariant extension polynomial such thatφ0 =1 ; and all the φj’s are meromorphic
functions on C∞
ˆS
which are regular away from ˜e (the Zet-orbit of the origin), and have a
pole of order at most 1 at the points of ˜e. Then there exists a Zet-invariant extension
polynomial
g =
n+1∑
i=0
ψn+1−i · T[i]
such that φj = ψj for 0 ≤ j ≤ n;a n dψn+1 is a meromorphic function on C∞
ˆS
which is
regular away from ˜e (the Zet-orbit of the origin), and has a pole of order at most 1 at the
points of ˜e.
Proof. First note that, since for 0 ≤ j ≤ n, the invariance condition discussed above (i.e.,
“ δ(φn−i)+ δ(φn−i−1)+ φn−i−1 = 0”) on the φj’s is precisely the same as the invariance
condition on the ψj’s, it thus follows that
? · T[0] +
n+1∑
i=1
φn+1−i · T[i]
91

deﬁnes a Zet-invariant section of the sheaf of extension polynomialsmodulo constant terms
on C∞
ˆS
. Moreover, since H1(CˆS, OCˆS
(e)) = 0, it thus follows that as long as we allow a
pole of order 1 at ˜e, this section lifts to a Zet-invariant extension polynomial
g =
n+1∑
i=0
ψn+1−i · T[i]
(where ψj = φj for j =0 ,... ,n,a n dψn+1 has the desired properties). This completes the
proof. ⃝
Theorem 6.4. Let n be a nonnegative integer. Then there exists a Zet-invariant exten-
sion polynomial
f =
n∑
i=0
ζn−i · T[i]
such that ζ0 =1 ;
δ(ζn−i)+ δ(ζn−i−1)+ ζn−i−1 =0
(for all i); and all the ζj’s are meromorphic functions onC∞
ˆS
which are regular away from
˜e (the Zet-orbit of the origin), and have a pole of order at most 1 at the points of ˜e.I n
particular, we have
δ(ζj)= −ζj−1 + ζj−2 − ... +( −1)j−1ζ1 +( −1)jζ0
(for all j). Finally, if ˆζ0,... , ˆζn satisfy the same conditions as ζ0,... ,ζn, then for each
j =0 ,... ,n,
ζj − ˆζj = some A−linear combination of ζ0,... ,ζj−1
(where A = O[[q]]).
Proof. The existence of ζ0,... ,ζn as stated follows by successively applying Lemma 6.3,
starting with the extension polynomial 1 (in the caser = 0). The second formula for δ(ζj)
follows by induction on j from the ﬁrst formula δ(ζn−i)+ δ(ζn−i−1)+ ζn−i−1 =0 .
Thus, it remains to see what happens if ˆζ0,... , ˆζn satisfy the same conditions as
ζ0,... ,ζn.W e p r o v e t h a tζj − ˆζj is an A-linear combination of ζ0,... ,ζj−1 by induction
92

on j. This is clear for j = 0 since, by assumption, ζ0 = ˆζ0 = 1. Now observe that, by the
induction hypothesis, both
δ(ζj)= −ζj−1 + ζj−2 − ... +( −1)j−1ζ1 +( −1)jζ0
and
δ(ˆζj)= − ˆζj−1 + ˆζj−2 − ... +( −1)j−1 ˆζ1 +( −1)j ˆζ0
are of the form “ −ζj−1 plus an A-linear combination of ζ0,... ,ζj−2.” Thus, by repeated
application of the formula
δ(ζl)= −ζl−1 + ζl−2 − ... +( −1)l−1ζ1 +( −1)lζ0
for l ≤ j − 1, it follows that there exists some
γ = ζj + η
where η is an A-linear combination of ζ0,... ,ζj−1, and, moreover,
δ(γ)= δ(ˆζj)
In particular, it follows thatϵ
def
= γ− ˆζj is a meromorphic function onC∞
ˆS
which is regular
away from ˜e, has a pole of order ≤ 1a tt h ep o i n t so f˜e, and, moreover, satisﬁes δ(ϵ)=0 ,
i.e., is Zet-invariant. But this implies that ϵ arises from a meromorphic function on CˆS
which is regular away from the origin, where it has a pole of order ≤ 1. In other words,
this meromorphic function onCˆS forms a regular section ofOCˆS
(e)o v e rCˆS. But it follows
from Riemann-Roch that such a function must be constant, i.e.,∈ A.T h u s ,ϵ = γ− ˆζj ∈ A.
This completes the proof. ⃝
Remark 1. Note that the ζj’s of Theorem 6.4 are not uniquely deﬁned (except for j =0 ) .
Nevertheless, we shall often refer to these ζj’s, which are useful for explicit computations,
as higher Schottky-Weierstrass ζ-functions. Also, we observe that if 2 ∈O ×, then the
function ζ of §5 serves as a “ζ1” in Theorem 6.4.
Remark 2. By using the Gm-splitting discussed in §3, one may also construct complex
analytic Schottky-Weierstrass ζ-functions, as follows. Namely, just as in §5, we may form
the complex analytic Schottky-Weierstrass ζ-function
ζ
93

by taking the diﬀerence between theGm-splitting of §3 and the meromorphic splitting Sor
of Corollary 4.4. This function is meromorphic onGm (in the usual sense of complex anal-
ysis), regular away from qZ ⊆ Gm, and satisﬁes (relative to the notation in the discussion
of the Gm-splitting in §3) the relation
ζ(q · U)= ζ(U) − 1
(where U is the standard multiplicative coordinate on Gm). Indeed, to check that this
relation is satisﬁed, it suﬃces (since all the functions involved depend meromorphically on
q and U)t oc h e c ki ta sq → 0. But this case is precisely the case where one is working
near the point at inﬁnity of M1,0(C), i.e., the case discussed in §5. Thus, by regarding
the various algebraic and formal algebraic functions of §5 as complex analytic functions,
we see that this relation follows from the corresponding formal algebraic relation proven in
Theorem 5.6. Finally, by performing exactly the same formal operations that we have done
in the present §, but this time in the complex analytic category, we also obtain complex
analytic higher Schottky-Weierstrass ζ-functions
ζ
0,... ,ζn
as in Theorem 6.4.
§7. Canonical Schottky-Weierstrass Zeta Functions
In this §, we continue the discussion of higher Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functions
begun in §6. The purpose of the present § is to construct two collections of canonical
higher Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functionsby means of various diﬀerential operators acting
on the line bundle under consideration. The ﬁrst type of canonical zeta function, which
we refer to as divided power canonical zeta functions, is the most basic type of canonical
zeta function. These divided power canonical zeta functions do not satisfy quite the same
relations (concerning the operator δ) as the functions of Theorem 6.4 (although they do
satisfy certain relations similar to the relations in Theorem 6.4), and, moreover, are not
integral, i.e., are only deﬁned over Q. The second type of canonical zeta function, which
we refer to asbinomial, is of the sort considered in Theorem 6.4, and, moreover, isintegral
except at the prime 2. Both the divided power and binomial canonical zeta functions of
the present § (as well as various other types, to be introduced later) play an important role
in the theory of this paper (cf., especially, Chapter V, §4; Chapter VII; Chapter VIII).
We maintain the notation of §6, except that in this §, we assume, until mentioned
otherwise, that O is a number ﬁeld.I np a r t i c u l a r ,O⊇ Q. As usual, we will write
L
C∞
ˆS
= OC∞
ˆS
(˜e)
94

where ˜e
def
= Zet(e) ⊆ C∞
ˆS
. Note that Zet acts on the global sections of LC∞
ˆS
over C∞
ˆS
.
Thus, in particular, the operator δof §6 deﬁned by
δ(f)
def
=1 et(f) − f
acts on Γ(C∞
ˆS
, LC∞
ˆS
). Just as in §6, we would like to study sections ofLC∞
ˆS
over C∞
ˆS
which
satisfy certain properties with respect to the operatorδ.
Next, let us observe that we also have another operator on sections of LC∞
ˆS
given by
the connection ∇ on LC∞
ˆS
deﬁned by the canonical section −κ (cf. Theorem 5.6). That
is to say, by Theorem 5.6, −2 · κ determines a connection on L⊗2
C∞
ˆS
,s o −κ determines a
connection on LC∞
ˆS
which is deﬁned whenever 2 ∈O × (as is the case here). Let us denote
the operator on sections of LC∞
ˆS
given by applying the connection ∇ in the direction U ∂
∂U
by
f ↦→ δ∗(f)
def
= ∇(U ∂
∂U )(f)
Note that since (cf. Theorem 5.6), 1 et(κ)= κ + d log(U), we obtain that 1 et(∇)=
∇− d log(U). Thus, 1et(δ∗)= δ∗ − 1 (i.e., 1et(δ∗(f)) = δ∗(1et(f)) − 1et(f)), so we obtain:
[δ∗,δ](f)=[ δ∗,1et](f)
= δ∗(1et(f)) − 1et(δ∗(f))
=1 et(f)
i.e., [δ∗,δ]=1 et. Roughly speaking,
It is natural to think ofδ∗ as “diﬀerentiation ∂ with respect to the holo-
morphic variable” and δ as “diﬀerentiation ∂ with respect to the anti-
holomorphic variable.”
Alternatively, one may think of the operatorδ∗ as a sort ofadjoint to the operator δ.T h i s
point of view is motivated by the complex analytic theory, which we will discuss in more
detail in Chapter VII, §4.
Next, let us observe that if we let ζ
PD
0 ∈ Γ(C∞
ˆS
, LC∞
ˆS
) be the section deﬁned by
“1 ∈O C∞
ˆS
(˜e),” then it follows from Theorem 5.6 that
δ∗(ζPD
0 )= ζ1
(where ζ1 is as in §5). Thus, it is natural to set (for any integer n ≥ 0)
95

ζPD
n
def
= 1
n!(δ∗)nζPD
0
Here, “PD” stands for “puissances divis´es” (i.e., “divided powers” in French).
Just as was the case with the higher Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functions of Theorem
6.4, the canonical Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functions ﬁt together to form “ Zet-invariant
extension polynomials” as follows: First, observe that in the above discussion, we worked
with various functions/sections of line bundles over C∞
ˆS
. In order to obtain Zet-invariant
extension polynomials, we must instead work with objects over E†
C |C∞
ˆS
. Recall that by
Corollary 5.7, E†
C |C∞
ˆS
→ C∞
ˆS
admits a natural splitting which allows us to regard the
push-forward of O
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
to C∞
ˆS
as the OC∞
ˆS
-algebra
OC∞
ˆS
[T]
(cf. the discussion at the beginning of §6). Note that by Theorem 4.2 (which we are
at liberty to apply since here, we are working in characteristic zero), the pull-back to
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
of the line bundle LC admits a tautological connection ∇taut. Here, just as in the
above discussion involving∇, we use the notation “(δtaut)∗” for the tautological connection
∇taut applied in the direction U ∂
∂U . Since the natural isomorphism of Corollary 5.7 is
an isomorphism of WˆS-torsors, it follows easily from the deﬁnitions that, relative to the
connection ∇ considered above (arising from −κ), we have:
(δtaut)∗ = δ∗ + T
Note that unlikeδ∗, the operator (δtaut)∗ descends (since it is “tautological”) toE†
C, hence
is Zet-invariant. Now we have the following result:
Lemma 7.1. We have (for n ≥ 0):
(i) δ∗(ζPD
n )=( n +1 ) · ζPD
n+1;
(ii) ζPD
n [T]
def
= ∑n
i=0 ζPD
i · Tn−i
(n−i)! is Zet-invariant.
(iii) δ(ζPD
n )= ∑n−1
i=0 (−1)i+n 1
(n−i)! ζPD
i = −ζPD
n−1 + 1
2 · ζPD
n−2 +...+( −1)n · 1
n! · ζPD
0 .
In particular, δn(ζPD
n )=( −1)n · ζPD
0 .
Proof. First, we observe that: (i) follows immediately from the deﬁnition of ζPD
n ; (iii)
follows from the Zet-invariance of (ii) by evaluating the expression of (ii) at “ U” equals
96

q ·U,“ T” equals 0 (which yields 1et(ζPD
n )), and noting that this is equal to the expression of
(ii) at “U” equalsU,“ T” equals−1 (which yields ∑n
i=0
(−1)i+n
(n−i)! ·ζPD
i ). Thus, it suﬃces to
prove (ii). But (ii) follows from theZet-invariance of (δtaut)∗: Indeed, since [ δ∗,T ]=0 ,
if we apply 1
n! · ((δtaut)∗)n to ζPD
0 (which is clearly Zet-invariant), we obtain:
1
n! · ((δtaut)∗)n(ζPD
0 )= 1
n! ·
n∑
i=0
(n
i
)
(δ∗)i(ζPD
0 ) · Tn−i
=
n∑
i=0
ζPD
i · Tn−i
(n − i)!
as desired. ⃝
Lemma 7.2. Any φ ∈ Γ(C∞
ˆS
, LC∞
ˆS
) such that δn+1(φ)=0 for some nonnegative
integer n may be written as aunique A-linear combination of ζPD
0 ,... ,ζPD
n .I np a r t i c u l a r ,
ζPD
0 ,... ,ζPD
n are linearly independent over A.
Proof. This follows by induction on n.I t i s c l e a r w h e nn =0( s i n c eΓ (C, LC)( ⊆
Γ(C∞
ˆS
, LC∞
ˆS
)) is a free A-module of rank 1 generated by ζPD
0 ). For arbitrary n ≥ 1,
if δn+1(φ) = 0, then by the induction hypothesis, δ(φ) may be written as an A-linear
combination ∑n−1
i=0 ci · ζPD
i . Thus, by Lemma 7.1, it follows that for some appropriate
c′
i ∈ A, the function φ− ∑n−1
i=0 c′
i ·ζPD
i+1 is contained in the kernel ofδ, hence can be written
as an A-multiple of ζPD
0 , as desired. Linear independence follows similarly by applying δ,
using the induction hypothesis and Lemma 7.1. ⃝
Deﬁnition 7.3. We shall refer the functionsζPD
n ∈ Γ(C∞
ˆS
, LC∞
ˆS
)a sdivided power (canon-
ical Schottky-Weierstrass) zeta functions.
Thus, putting everything together, we see that we have proven the following result:
Theorem 7.4. (Divided Power Canonical Schottky-Weierstrass Functions) Let
ζPD
0 ∈ Γ(C∞
ˆS
, LC∞
ˆS
) be the function “1” ∈O C∞
ˆS
(˜e). Write (for n ∈ Z≥0)
ζPD
n
def
= 1
n!(δ∗)nζPD
0
(and let ζPD
n
def
=0 if n< 0). (Thus, in particular, the function ζPD
1 here is the same as the
function “ζ1” of Theorem 5.6.) Thenδ∗(ζPD
n )=( n +1 ) · ζPD
n+1, δn(ζPD
n )=( −1)n · ζPD
0 (if
n ≥ 0);
97

δ(ζPD
n )= ∑n−1
i=0 (−1)i+n 1
(n−i)!ζPD
i = −ζPD
n−1 + 1
2 · ζPD
n−2 +...+( −1)n · 1
n! · ζPD
0
(for all n ∈ Z). Moreover, the A-submodule of Γ(C∞
ˆS
, LC∞
ˆS
) generated by ζPD
0 ,... ,ζPD
n is
equal to the A-submodule of sections of Γ(C∞
ˆS
, LC∞
ˆS
) which are annihilated by δn+1.I n
particular, this submodule is equal to the A-submodule of Γ(C∞
ˆS
, LC∞
ˆS
) generated by the
functions denoted “ζ0,... ,ζn” in Theorem 6.4. Finally, the polynomial
ζPD
n [T]
def
=
n∑
i=0
ζPD
i · Tn−i
(n − i)! = ζPD
0 · Tn
n! + ζPD
1 · T(n−1)
(n − 1)! +...+ ζPD
n−1 · T + ζPD
n
(∈ Γ(C∞
ˆS
, LC∞
ˆS
[T]))i s Zet-invariant (relative to the natural action of Zet on C∞
ˆS
, LC∞
ˆS
,
and the action of Zet on T given by 1et(T)= T +1 ).
Remark 1. Just as was the case with Theorem 6.4, Theorem 7.4 also has acomplex analytic
version. We leave the routine details to the reader.
Remark 2. It is clear from the formula for δ(ζPD
n ) that the denominators that occur
are “essential” (i.e., they cannot be eliminated as in the case of Theorem 6.4 simply
by “redeﬁning the integral structure” as in Deﬁnition 6.2). In fact, we shall see (cf.
Chapter VI) that the functions of Theorem 6.4 are more suited to the study of the universal
extension at ﬁnite primes (i.e., in mixed characteristic), where as the functions of Theorem
7.4 are more suited to the study of the universal extension atinﬁnite primes (cf. Chapter
VII; Chapter VIII).
Remark 3. One “generating function-theoretic” way to summarize the content of Theorem
7.4 is the following: Let s be an indeterminate. Note that
[ δ, (δ
taut)∗ ]=[ δ, δ∗ + T ]=0
Thus, since δ(ζPD
0 )=0 , δalso annihilates
e(δ∗+T)·s · ζPD
0 =
∑
n≥0
( n∑
i=0
ζPD
i · Tn−i
(n − i)!
)
· sn
= ζPD
0 [T]+ ζPD
1 [T] · s + ζPD
2 [T] · s2 +...+ ζPD
n [T] · sn +...
98

The coeﬃcients of this series are precisely the functions discussed in Theorem 7.4.
Next, we would like to construct the binomial canonical Schottky-Weierstrass func-
tions. First, recall the polynomials
T[n] def
= 1
n!T(T − 1)(T − 2) · ... · (T − (n − 1))
discussed in §6. If D is any operator, we shall denote by
(D
n
)
the operator obtained by substituting D into the polynomial T[n].
Lemma 7.5. If D1 and D2 are any two commuting operators, we have (forn a positive
integer)
(D1 + D2
n
)
=
n∑
m=0
(D1
m
)
·
( D2
n − m
)
Proof. This identity is essentially an equality between two polynomials (i.e., the expres-
sions on the left- and right-hand sides) in two variables (i.e., D1, D2). Thus, it holds
if and only if holds when D1 and D2 are arbitrary positive integers. But for such D1
and D2, this identity may be checked by considering the coeﬃcients of xn in the equality
(1 +x)D1+D2 =( 1+ x)D1 · (1 +x)D2 (where x is an indeterminate). ⃝
Now we deﬁne ζBI
0
def
= ζPD
0 ;( f o rn a positive integer) ζBI
n
def
=
(δ∗
n
)
(ζPD
0 );
ζBI
n [T]
def
=
(δ∗ + T
n
)
(ζPD
0 )=
n∑
m=0
ζBI
m · T[n−m]
Note that the Zet-invariance of (δtaut)∗ = δ∗+ T implies that ζBI
n [T]i sa l s oZet-invariant.
In particular, the ζBI
n are higher Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functions in the sense of the
Theorem 6.4. From a “generating function-theoretic” point of view, one can write
(1 +s)(δ∗+T) · ζBI
0 =
∑
n≥0
ζBI
n [T] · sn
= ζBI
0 [T]+ ζBI
1 [T] · s + ζBI
2 [T] · s2 +...+ ζBI
n [T] · sn +...
99

Finally, we observe that the ζBI
n are integral over Z[1
2 ]. Indeed, to see this, we reason as
follows: Recall the sectionσalg ∈ Γ(C, LC)o f §5. If we apply
(δ∗
n
)
to (σalg)2|C∞
ˆS
=( σan)2 ·θ,
which is a series with Z-integral coeﬃcients in the monomials
{qk2+k · U2k+1 · θ,qk2
· U2k · θ,qk2−k · U2k−1 · θ}
then since
(δ∗
n
)
acts on Uk by multiplication by
(k
n
)
, we obtain that
(δ∗
n
)
(σalg)2|C∞
ˆS
is Z-
integral. On the other hand, ζBI
n is essentially
(δ∗
n
)
(σalg)|C∞
ˆS
,s ot h eZ[1
2 ]-integrality of ζBI
n
follows formally by solving for 2 · sn(δ∗
n
)
(σalg)|C∞
ˆS
(and applying induction on n)i nt h e
formal identity
(1 +s)δ∗
{(σalg)2} = {(1 +s)δ∗
(σalg)}2
(where we note that this formal identity follows from the general fact that if X is any
“operator” on “(commuting) functions” A, B which satisﬁes the Leibniz rule, then the
identity eX(A · B)= eX(A) · eX(B) is a formal consequence of the Leibniz rule).
Deﬁnition 7.6. We shall refer the functions ζBI
n ∈ Γ(C∞
ˆS
, LC∞
ˆS
)a s binomial (canonical
Schottky-Weierstrass) zeta functions.
Theorem 7.7. (Binomial Canonical Schottky-Weierstrass Functions) Let ζBI
0 ∈
Γ(C∞
ˆS
, LC∞
ˆS
) be the function “1” ∈O C∞
ˆS
(˜e). Write (for n ∈ Z≥0) ζBI
n
def
=
(δ∗
n
)
(ζBI
0 );
ζBI
n [T]
def
=
(δ∗ + T
n
)
(ζBI
0 )=
n∑
m=0
ζBI
m · T[n−m]
Then the ζBI
n , ζBI
n [T]’s satisfy the properties of Theorem 6.4 (where we take “ζn”o fT h e -
orem 6.4 to be ζBI
n ;“ f” of Theorem 6.4 to be ζBI
n [T]). In particular, the ζBI
n [T]’s are
Zet-invariant. Finally, the ζBI
n [T]’s are integral overZ[1
2 ].
100

Bibliography
[Ahlf] L. Ahlfors, Complex Analysis, McGraw-Hill Book Company (1979).
[Falt] G. Faltings, Stable G-Bundles and Projective Connections, Journal of Algebraic Ge-
ometry 2, No. 3 (1993), pp. 507-568.
[FC] G. Faltings and C.-L. Chai, Degenerations of Abelian Varieties, Springer (1990).
[Kato] K. Kato, Logarithmic Structures of Fontaine-Illusie, Proceedings of the First JAMI
Conference, Johns Hopkins Univ. Press (1990), pp. 191-224.
[Katz] N. Katz, The Eisenstein Measure andp-adic Interpolation, Amer. Journ. of Math.99,
No. 2 (1977), pp. 238-311.
[KM] N. Katz and B. Mazur, Arithmetic Moduli of Elliptic Curves, Annals of Mathematics
Studies 108, Princeton Univ. Press (1985).
[Knud] F. F. Knudsen, The Projectivity of the Moduli Space of Stable Curves, II, Math.
Scand. 52 (1983), pp. 161-199.
[Mats] H. Matsumura, Commutative Algebra (Second Edition) , The Benjamin/Cummings
Publishing Company (1980).
[MB] L. Moret-Bailly, Pinceaux de vari´et´es ab´eliennes,A s t ´erisque 129, Soc. Math. France
(1985).
[Mumf] D. Mumford, An Analytic Construction of Degenerating Abelian Varieties over Com-
plete Rings, Appendix to [FC].
[Mzk1] S. Mochizuki, A Theory of Ordinary p-adic Curves, RIMS Preprint 1033 (September
1995); Publ. of RIMS 32, No. 6 (1996), pp. 957-1151.
[Mzk2] S. Mochizuki, Foundations of p-adic Teichm¨uller Theory, AMS/IP Studies in Ad-
vanced Mathematics 11, American Mathematical Society/International Press (1999).
101

Chapter IV: Theta Groups and Theta Functions
§0. Introduction
In this Chapter, we discuss theta groups in various contexts. These groups will play a
key role in this paper. In §1, we review the “classical theory” of theta groups andalgebraic
theta functions of [Mumf1,2,3], specialized to the case of elliptic curves. In §2, we discuss
the relationship between this sort of theta action, and the theta action that one considers
in the case of the Schottky uniformization of a degenerating elliptic curve. In §3, we use
the theory of §2 to deﬁne twisted Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functions, which will play an
important role in the calculations of Chapter V. In §4, we review Zhang’s theory ([Zh]) of
metrized line bundles. Finally, in §5, we discuss the relationship between Zhang’s theory
and the theory of Mumford reviewed in §1. We then apply this discussion to compute
various degrees of push-forwards of metrized line bundles.
§1. Mumford’s Algebraic Theta Functions
In this §, we review the deﬁnitions and basic properties oftheta groups (cf., e.g., [MB],
Chapitres V, VI) and algebraic theta functions (cf. [Mumf1,2,3]). See also [Mumf4] for
basic facts concerning abelian varieties. Let
f : E → S
be an elliptic curve over a schemeS, with identity sectione : S → E.L e tL be a relatively
ample, symmetric line bundle on E, of relative degree d (over S). Then it is not diﬃcult
to show that L is necessarily of the form:
L
def
= OE((d − 1) · [e]+[ τ]) ⊗OS M
where τ ∈ E(S) is a section such that 2 · τ=0 ,a n dM is a line bundle on S.
For any point α ∈ E(T)o v e ra nS-scheme T, the line bundle
(T ∗
α L) ⊗L −1
(where ET
def
= E ×S T; Tα : ET → ET is translation by α)o n ET is of relative degree 0
over T, hence deﬁnes (by α ↦→ (T ∗
α L) ⊗L −1) a homomorphism
102

φL : E → E
whose kernel
KL =K e r ( [d]: E → E)
is the kernel of multiplication by d on E.I n p a r t i c u l a r ,KL is a ﬁnite, ﬂat group scheme
over S.
Next, we deﬁne the scheme
GL
to be the scheme that represents pairs (α,ι), where α ∈ E(T) belongs to KL(T), and
ι: T ∗
α L ∼= L is an isomorphism of line bundles on ET .T h e nGL has a natural structure of
group scheme over S which ﬁts into an exact sequence (in, say, the ﬁnite ﬂat topology of
S):
1 → (Gm)S →G L → KL → 1
where the projection GL → KL is given by (α,ι) ↦→ α, and the inclusion (Gm)S ↪→G L is
given by the natural action of (Gm)S on L. Although ( Gm)S lies in the center of GL,i n
general, GL will not be commutative. Indeed, the commutator map (α,β) ↦→ α·β·α−1 ·β−1
(for α,β ∈G L(T)) deﬁnes a bilinear nondegenerate pairing
[−, −]: KL × KL → (Gm)S
The group scheme GL is called the theta group associated to the line bundle L.
Next, we would like to consider quasi-coherent OS-modules equipped with an action
of GL such that (Gm)S ⊆G L acts via the “identity character” ( Gm)S → (Gm)S.W e
shall refer to such modules as “ OS[GL]-modules,” for short. Note that it follows from the
deﬁnition of GL that
V
def
= f∗L
has a natural structure of OS[GL]-module. Moreover, one has the following (cf. [MB],
Chapitre V, Corollaire 2.4.3):
Theorem 1.1. The operation “⊗OS V” induces an equivalence of categories between the
category of quasi-coherent OS-modules and the category of OS[GL]-modules. Moreover,
103

up to tensor product with a line bundle on S, V is the unique OS[GL]-module with this
property.
Example 1.2. Now suppose that we have an isomorphism
KL ∼= μd × (Z/dZ)
such that the pairing discussed above is given by ( α,β) ↦→ αβ,f o r α ∈ μd, β ∈ Z/dZ,
λ ∈ Gm(T). Then one may construct GL,a sw e l la st h eGL-module V explicitly, as follows.
First of all, the T-valued points (for an S-scheme T) GL(T) of the group scheme GL may
be thought of as the set of triples (α,β, λ), where α ∈ μd, β ∈ Z/dZ, λ ∈ Gm(T), and the
multiplication law is given by:
(α1,β1,λ1) · (α2,β2,λ2)=( α1 · α2,β1 + β2,λ1 · λ2 · α−β1
2 )
Now deﬁne the GL-module W as the free OS-module
W
def
= OS · e0 ⊕O S · e1 ⊕ ... ⊕O S · ed−1
(where we think of the indices of the ei as elements of Z/dZ)o nw h i c h( 0,0,λ) ∈G L(T)
acts via the OS-module structure; (α,0,1) acts on ei via ei ↦→ αi · ei;a n d( 0,β, 1) maps ei
to ei+β. Then the resulting OS[GL]-module W is isomorphic to
M⊗ OS f∗L
where M is a line bundle on S.
Next, we consider Lagrangian subgroupsof GL.L e t
KH ⊆ KL
be a subgroup scheme of KL which is ´etale locally (on S) isomorphic to either to μd or
to Z/dZ, and, moreover, has the property that the restriction of the pairing KL × KL →
(Gm)S discussed above to KH is trivial. Then the inverse image GH ⊆G L of KH deﬁnes
an abelian group scheme over S which ﬁts into an exact sequence
1 → (Gm)S →G H → KH → 1
If KH is ´etale locally isomorphic to μd,t h e n(Gm)S and KH are both group schemes of
multiplicative type. Hence, it follows that the splittings of this exact sequence are equiv-
alent to splittings of the corresponding exact sequence of character groups (i.e., the exact
104

sequence given by applying Hom(−,(Gm)S) to the above exact sequence). In particular,
we see that the above exact sequence splits ´etale locally on S.I f KH is ´etale locally iso-
morphic to Z/dZ, then the issue of whether or not this sequence splits is more delicate,
but in the cases that we are interested in, this sequence will, in fact, split.
Suppose that
H ⊆G H
is a splitting of the above exact sequence. Then we have a natural isomorphismH ∼= KH.
Deﬁnition 1.3. We shall refer to a subgroup KH ⊆ KL as above as a Lagrangian
subgroup of KL. We shall refer to splittings H ⊆G H as Lagrangian subgroups of GL.
Remark. Note that the deﬁnition of “Lagrangian” here is somewhat diﬀerent from that
of [MB]. Nevertheless, when applied to H (as opposed to KH), any Lagrangian subgroup
relative to Deﬁnition 1.3 is also Lagrangian for [MB], Chapitre V, D´eﬁnition 2.5.1.
The following result is proven in [MB], Chapitre V, Th´eor`eme 3.2, (i); Chapitre VI,
Propositions 1.2, 1.4.5:
Theorem 1.4. Let H ⊆G L be Lagrangian. Then the correspondence
M ↦→M H
deﬁnes a equivalence of categories between the category ofOS[GL]-modules and the category
of quasi-coherent OS-modules. Moreover, H ⊆G L deﬁnes a line bundle LH on the elliptic
curve EH
def
= E/KH together with an isomorphism LH |E ∼= L. Finally, this isomorphism
induces an isomorphism
(f∗L)H ∼= (fH)∗(LH)
(where fH : EH → S is the structure morphism).
Remark. In fact, to give a line bundle LH on EH = E/KH together with an isomorphism
LH |E ∼= L is equivalent to giving the datum of the lifting H ⊆G L of KH ⊆ KL.T h u s ,
often instead of specifying (respectively, showing the existence of) the lifting H ⊆G L,w e
will specify (respectively, show the existence of) the line bundle LH on EH = E/KH.
Theorem 1.4 is convenient for reducing proofs concerning f∗L to proofs concerning
(fH)∗(LH).
105

We are now ready to review Mumford’s construction of algebraic theta functions (cf.
[Mumf1,2,3]). In the remainder of this §, we assume, for simplicity, that
τ= e
If N ∈ Z,l e tu sw r i t e[N]: E → E for the map given by multiplication by N. Note that
the map [ −1] : E → E is an automorphism of E of order 2 such that [ −1]∗L = L, i.e.,
by “=,” we mean the isomorphism between [ −1]∗L and L arising from the fact that (up
to tensor product with a line bundle on S) L is the line bundle associated to the divisor
d · [e], which is ﬁxed by [ −1]. Thus, from the deﬁnition of GL, it follows that [ −1] gives
rise to an automorphism
δL : GL →G L
of order 2 whose restriction to (Gm)S is the identity and which induces the inverse mor-
phism on the quotient KL of GL.L e tu sw r i t e
SL ⊆G L
for the subscheme of T-valued points (where T is an S-scheme) γ ∈G L satisfying δL(γ)=
γ−1. Such points γ are often referred to as symmetric (cf. [Mumf1], Deﬁnition, p. 309).
One checks easily that the projection
SL → KL
is surjective, ﬁnite, and ﬂat, and that it is, in fact, a torsor over μ2 (⊆ Gm). In the
following discussion, we would like to show that this torsor admits a natural section over
2 · KL ⊆ KL.
The construction of this section, as well as the sort of section obtained, diﬀer slightly,
depending on whether d is even or odd. We begin by making the following construction,
which is valid regardless of the parity of d:F o rα ∈ KL(T)( w h e r eT is an S-scheme), if
˜α ∈G L(T) is any element that lifts α, then the assignment
α ↦→ ˜α · δL(˜α−1)
(where we note that the right-hand side is independent of the choice of˜α since δL induces
the identity on (Gm)S ⊆G L) deﬁnes a morphism
σ1 : KL →G L
which factors through SL ⊆G L, and whose composite with the projection GL → KL is the
morphism [2] :KL → KL (multiplication by 2 onKL). (Note, that here we write the group
106

law of KL additively.) Indeed, these facts follow from the fact thatδL is an automorphism
of the group scheme GL of order 2 which induces the automorphism [−1] on the quotient
KL of GL. This morphism σ1 is not (in general) a group homomorphism, but does satisfy
the following property:
Lemma 1.5. Let α,β ∈ KL(T) (where T is an S-scheme). Then
σ1(α + β)=[ α,β]−2 · σ1(α) · σ1(β)
(where we write the group law of KL (respectively, GL) additively (respectively, multipli-
cately)). In particular, it follows that: (i.) if [α,β]2 =1 ∈ Gm,t h e nσ1(α + β)=
σ1(α) · σ1(β); (ii.) the restriction of σ1 to any subgroup scheme of KL on which the pair-
ing [−, −] (discussed above) is trivial — we shall call such subgroup schemes“[ −, −]-trivial”
—i sa group homomorphism.
Proof. Indeed, if ˜β ∈G L(T) lifts β,t h e n˜α · ˜β lifts α + β,s ow eh a v e :
σ1(α + β)= ˜α · ˜β · δL( ˜β−1 · ˜α−1)
= ˜α · ( ˜β · δL( ˜β−1)) · δL(˜α−1)
=[ α,β]−2 · ˜α · δL(˜α−1) · ( ˜β · δL( ˜β−1))
=[ α,β]−2 · σ1(α) · σ1(β)
as desired. The remaining assertions follow immediately. ⃝
Thus, at any rate, if d is odd, then multiplication by [2] deﬁnes an automorphism on
KL, so we obtain by σ1 deﬁnes a section
σ : KL (= 2 · KL) →G L
(such that σ · [2] = σ1), as desired.
Next, we consider the case when d is even. First, we introduce some notation: Let us
write
d0
def
= 1
2d
For N ∈ Z, let us denote the kernel of [N]: E → E by
N E
def
=k e r ( [N]: E → E)
107

Then I claim that the morphism σ1 : KL = dE →G L factors through KL/2E ∼= d0 E.
Indeed, it suﬃces to prove that for any α,β ∈ KL(T)( f o rT an S-scheme) such that
2β =0 ,w eh a v eσ1(α+β)= σ1(α). But by Lemma 1.5, we haveσ1(α+β)= σ1(α) ·σ1(β)
(since [α,β]2 =[ α,2β]=[ α,0] = 1). Thus, it suﬃces to show that σ1(β) = 1. But
this follows from the fact that since the line bundle L is totally symmetric (cf. [Mumf1],
§2, Propositions 3, 6; Corollary 2), after ﬁnite ﬂat localization, we may choose the lift
˜β ∈G L(T)o f β ∈ KL(T) to lie inside SL(T) ⊆G L(T) and (at the same time) satisfy
˜β2 =1 . T h u s ,σ1(β)= ˜β · δL( ˜β)−1 = ˜β2 = 1, as desired. This completes the proof of the
claim.
Note that we have:
2 · KL
def
= d0 E ⊆ dE = KL
In particular, we obtain a morphism
σ :2 · KL →G L
which factors through SL ⊆G L, and whose composite with the projection GL → KL is
the natural injection 2 · KL ⊆ KL. That is to say, in the even case, we obtain a section
of GL → KL over the subgroup scheme 2 · KL ⊆ KL. This completes our discussion of the
even case.
Observe that in both the even and odd cases, the section σ over 2 · KL that we
constructed satisﬁes the following property: If α =2 α1,β =2 β1 ∈ 2 · KL(T)( w h e r eT is
an S-scheme), then
σ(α + β) · σ(α)−1 · σ(β)−1 =[ α1,β1]2
(where we note that since [ KL,2E]2 =[ KL,0] = 1, it follows (a priori!) that [ α1,β1]2
depends only on α, β). Indeed, this relation follows immediately from Lemma 1.5. Let us
observe that although the proof of Lemma 1.5 depends on the explicit deﬁnition of σ in
terms of δL,t h esquare of the above relation, i.e.,
{σ(α + β) · σ(α)−1 · σ(β)−1}2 =[ α,β]
may be proven solely from the assumption that σ maps into SL ⊆G L: Indeed, let us
denote σ(α+β) ·σ(α)−1 ·σ(β)−1 ∈ Gm(T)b y λ.T h e ns i n c eσ(α+β) ∈S L(T), we obtain
δL(σ(β)) ·δL(σ(α)) ·λ = λ−1 ·σ(α)−1 ·σ(β)−1. If we combine this withδL(σ(α)) = σ(α)−1,
δL(σ(β)) = σ(β)−1, then the result follows immediately.
Next, note that ifα ∈ E(S), then transport of structure deﬁnes a natural isomorphism
Gα : GT ∗
α L ∼= GL
108

which is compatible with the injections of Gm, and projections to KL = KT ∗
α L on both
sides. Thus, by conjugating by Gα, we see that σ :2 · KL →G L deﬁnes a section
σα :2 · KT ∗
α L →G T ∗
α L
In summary, we have proven the following result (which is implicit in the theory of [Mumf1],
§2):
Theorem 1.6. Let E → S be an elliptic curve over a scheme S.L e t d be a positive
integer. Let M be a line bundle on S. Write
L
def
= OE(d · [e]) ⊗OS M
Then:
(1) There is a canonical section
σ :2 · KL →G L
of the projectionGL → KL over 2 ·KL ⊆ KL that maps into SL ⊆G L,i s
functorial in S, and whose restriction to[−, −]-trivial subgroup schemes
of 2 ·KL is a group homomorphism. Moreover, these properties uniquely
determine σ over 4 · KL.
(2) The section σ is related to the pairing [−, −]: KL × KL → (Gm)S by
the following formula: If α =2 α1,β =2 β1 ∈ 2 · KL(T) (where T is an
S-scheme), then
σ(α + β) · σ(α)−1 · σ(β)−1 =[ α1,β1]2
In particular, we have: {σ(α + β) · σ(α)−1 · σ(β)−1}2 =[ α,β].
(3) Finally, if α ∈ E(S),t h e nσ deﬁnes a section
σα :2 · KT ∗
α L →G T ∗
α L
by transport of structure via the translation morphism Tα : E → E.
Now suppose that d is odd (respectively, even). Then K0
L
def
= KL/2 · KL is = S
(respectively, ∼= 2E). If one thinks of σ as a 2·KL-valued point of GL, then it follows from
the deﬁnition of GL that if α ∈ E(S)i sa n yS-valued point, thenσ induces an isomorphism
109

L|T ∗
α KL
∼= (L|α0 ) ⊗OK0
L
OKL
for some line bundle L|α0 on the quotientK0
L of KL. Thus, put another way, the canonical
section σ determines natural descent data for L|T ∗
α KL from KL to K0
L.( T h u s ,i fd is odd,
then we may think of this isomorphism as atrivialization of the restriction of the line bundle
L to the subscheme T ∗
α KL.) In particular, restriction to T ∗
α KL deﬁnes (by composing with
the above isomorphism) a morphism of OK0
L
-modules with natural GL-action:
f∗L→ (L|α0 ) ⊗OK0
L
OKL
In other words, this morphism allows us to think of global sections of L over E as being
(essentially) functions on the subscheme T ∗
α KL. These functions are the algebraic theta
functions of [Mumf1,2,3].
§2. Theta Actions and the Schottky Uniformization
In this §, we discuss the relationship between torsion actions on line bundles (i.e., as
in §1) and the uniformization theory reviewed in Chapter III, §5. Thus, in this §, we will
use the same notation as in Chapter III, §5. We begin by reviewing this notation. First of
all, O is a Zariski localization of the ring of integers of a ﬁnite extension of Q;
A
def
= O[[q]]; S
def
=S p e c (A); ˆS
def
= Spf( A)
(where q is an indeterminate, and we regard A as equipped with the q-adic topology).
Over S, we had a natural elliptic curve E → S, together with a compactiﬁcation C → S
whose pull-back CˆS → ˆS to ˆS may be obtained as a quotient of an object C∞
ˆS
with respect
to the natural action of the group Zet on C∞
ˆS
. Moreover, we have a natural identiﬁcation
EˆS =( Gm)ˆS.T h e special ﬁber (C∞
ˆS
)spl of C∞
ˆS
(i.e., the zero locus of the function q)i sa
chain of P1’s over Spec(O) indexed by Z and permuted by the action of Zet in a fashion
which is compatible with the indexing by Z and the natural action of Zet = Z on Z (by
addition). Recall that we denoted the origin of E by e. This origin, regarded as a divisor
in E or C, gives rise to line bundles LE
def
= OE(e), LC
def
= OC(e). The inverse image of e
in C∞
ˆS
(via the quotient map C∞
ˆS
→ CˆS) is denoted by ˜e ⊆ C∞
ˆS
. In Chapter III, §5, we
also discussed how
Γ(C∞
ˆS , L⊗2i
C∞
ˆS
)
110

(where LC∞
ˆS
def
= LC |C∞
ˆS
) may be described explicitly as the degree i portion of a certain
graded ring R′
E. This explicit description will play a key role in this §, and, indeed, in the
proof of the main results of this paper.
In the following, we ﬁx apositive even numbern =2 m. Then let us recall (cf. [Mumf5],
p. 289) that there is a natural action of (Gm)ˆS = EˆS on C∞
ˆS
and L⊗2
C∞
ˆS
.I n p a r t i c u l a r ,
we obtain a natural action of (μn)ˆS (i.e., the kernel of multiplication by n on the abelian
group object (Gm)ˆS)o n C∞
ˆS
and LC∞
ˆS
. On the other hand, one also has a natural action
of Zet in C∞
ˆS
and L⊗2
C∞
ˆS
. Moreover, it is easy to see from the deﬁnitions of these actions
of Zet and (μn)ˆS (i.e., (μn)ˆS acts trivially on θ – cf. [Mumf5], p. 289; the action of Zet,
namely, 1et(θ)= q · U2 · θ, is discussed in Chapter III, §5) that they commute on C∞
ˆS
and
L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
. Thus, it follows that we may form the quotients
˜C∞
ˆS
def
= C∞
ˆS /μn; ˜CˆS
def
= CˆS/μn; ˜EˆS
def
= EˆS/μn; ˜MˆS
def
= L⊗n
CˆS
/μn
of C∞
ˆS
, CˆS, EˆS,a n dL⊗n
CˆS
, respectively, by (μn)ˆS. Indeed, in the case of C∞
ˆS
, if we think
of C∞
ˆS
as the q-adic completion of a sort of N´eron model of Gm over A[q−1]( c f . t h e
discussion in Chapter III, §5), then the quotient C∞
ˆS
→ ˜C∞
ˆS
is just the quotient induced
on completions of N´eron models by the morphism Gm → Gm given by multiplication by
n. Finally, note that ˜MˆS deﬁnes a line bundle of degree 1 on ˜CˆS whose pull-back to CˆS
is L⊗n
CˆS
.
Next, let us write
C[n]
ˆS
def
= C∞
ˆS /(n · Zet)
Thus, we obtain covering morphisms
C∞
ˆS → C[n]
ˆS
→ CˆS → ˜CˆS
where the ﬁrst two morphisms are ´etale with Galois groupsn·Zet and Zet/n
def
= Zet/n·Zet,
respectively, and the last morphism is the quotient by the action of ( μn)ˆS.M o r e o v e r ,
the last two morphisms may be algebraized (along with the line bundle ˜MˆS on ˜CˆS)i n t o
morphisms
C[n] → C → ˜C
(and a line bundle ˜M on ˜C) which compactify isogenies of smooth group schemes
111

E[n] Zet/n
−→ E μn
−→ ˜E
over S. Here, the groups over the arrows denote the kernels of the respective arrows,
or, alternatively, the ﬁnite group schemes with respect to which the arrows are torsors.
The group schemes E and ˜E have connected special ﬁbers, while the group of connected
components of the special ﬁber of E
[n] may be identiﬁed with Zet/n.M o r e o v e r ,
Πn
def
=( Zet/n) × μn
acts on C[n] and E[n],a n dE[n] → ˜E is naturally a Πn-torsor.
Next, observe that the group of line bundles on ˜E whose pull-back to E[n] is trivial
may be identiﬁed with the group of characters
Hom(Πn,(Gm)S) = Hom(Πn,(μn)S)
(where the “Hom” is with respect to group schemes over S, or equivalently in this case,
over Spec(A[q−1])). Indeed, this correspondence may be given explicitly as follows. Given
a character
χ ∈ Hom(Πn,(μn)S)
one obtains an action of Π n on the trivial OE[n] -module OE[n] that covers the natural
action of Πn on E[n] by multiplying the trivial action of Πn on OE[n] by χ. Let us denote
OE[n] equipped with this action by Oχ
E[n] . Then taking Π n-invariants of Oχ
E[n] gives us
(since E[n] → ˜E is a Πn-torsor) a line bundle Oχ
˜E
on ˜E whose restriction to E[n] is equal
to Oχ
E[n] and whose n-th power is trivial. Put another way, Oχ
˜E
may be thought of as the
sheaf of functions f(ϵ)o n E[n] which satisfy the transformation rule:
f(α · ϵ)= χ(α)−1 · f(ϵ)
(for all points α (valued in some scheme) of Πn). This correspondence
χ ↦→O χ
˜E
induces the natural bijection between characters and line bundles referred to above. Also,
note that although it is not clear whether or not Oχ
˜E
extends to a line bundle on ˜C,i t
is clear that the line bundle with Π n-action Oχ
E[n] on E[n] extends to a line bundle with
Πn-action Oχ
C[n] on C[n].
Next, let us observe that the line bundle
112

˜L˜C
def
= O ˜C(˜e)
(where ˜e is the identity of ˜E) satisﬁes
˜L˜C |C[n] = OC[n] ([Πn]) ∼= OC[n] (n · [Zet/n]) = L⊗n
C |C[n] = ˜M|C[n]
(where [Π n]a n d[Zet/n] denote the divisors in C[n] deﬁned by the respective subgroup
schemes of E[n]). Here, the isomorphism “ ∼=” in the middle follows from the fact that,
since the image ofμn forms a subgroup scheme inC[n] annihilated byn,a n dOC[n] ([Zet/n])
is a line bundle of degreen on C[n], we obtain that translation byμn ﬁxes the isomorphism
class of OC[n] ([Zet/n]), hence that OC[n] ([Πn]) ∼= OC[n] (n · [Zet/n]), as desired. Thus, it
follows from the discussion above concerning characters that there exists a unique χ ∈
Hom(Πn,(μn)S) such that
˜L˜E = Oχ
˜E
⊗O˜E
( ˜M| ˜E)
We are now ready to state the main result of this §:
Theorem 2.1. The character χ ∈ Hom(Πn,(μn)S) such that
˜L˜E = Oχ
˜E
⊗O˜E
( ˜M| ˜E)
(is the unique character which) satisﬁes: χ(1et)= −1; χ|μn : μn → μn is the character
given by raising to the m-th power.
Proof. To simplify notation, write ψ
def
= θm. Recall (cf. [Mumf5], especially p. 289) that
the action of Zet × μn on ψ which gives rise to the line bundle ˜M is the trivial action. In
the following, we shall wish to take objects which have some action ofZet × μn deﬁned in
[Mumf5], and twist this action by the character χ described in the statement of Theorem
2.1. We shall denote the resulting objects with twisted action by means of a superscript
or subscript χ (whichever is more convenient), and write, for instance,
[−1](ψ)= ψ;[ −1](ψ
χ)= −ψχ
(where [−1] is a generator ofμn/μm = μ2). Since ˜L has a unique (up to constant multiples)
nonzero global section whose zero locus is precisely ˜e, it suﬃces to check that the set of
Zet × μn-invariant sections of (L⊗m
C∞
ˆS
)χ on (C∞
ˆS
)spl has a generator whose zero locus on the
113

Gm inside (C∞
ˆS
)spl which contains the identity is precisely the zero locus of Un − 1 (i.e.,
the inverse image of ˜e ⊆ ˜E).
To show this, recall from Chapter III, §5, that the image of Γ( C∞
ˆS
, L⊗m
C∞
ˆS
) under re-
striction to this Gm is the O-module generated by
Um · ψχ,U m−1 · ψχ, ... ,U · ψχ,ψ χ,U −1 · ψχ, ... ,U −m+1 · ψχ,U −m · ψχ
Since the only μm-invariant (where μm ⊆ μn) Ui are those for which i is divisible by m,
and, moreover, [ −1](ψχ)= −ψχ ̸= ψχ (where [ −1] is a generator of μn/μm = μ2), it
follows that the μn-invariant subspace of this image is given by the O-module generated
by the two elements:
Um · ψχ,U −m · ψχ
Moreover, we have
1et(U −m · ψχ)= χ(1et) · (q · U)−m · (q · U2)m · ψχ = χ(1et) · Um · ψχ = −Um · ψχ
Thus, the Zet × μn-invariant subspace is generated by
(Um − U −m) · ψχ
whose zero locus is the same as that of Un − 1, as desired. ⃝
Before concluding this §, we make some ﬁnal remarks which will be helpful for the
computations that we will perform later. First, observe that it is a consequence of the dis-
cussion at the beginning of Chapter III, §5, that Γ(C
∞
ˆS
, L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
) is topologically A-generated
by the sections
Um · θm,U m−1 · θm, ... ,U · θm,θ m,U −1 · θm, ... ,U −m+1 · θm,U −m · θm
and their Zet-translates. Let us compute these Zet-translates. Since 1 et(U)= q · U,
1et(θ)= q · U2 · θ, we obtain, for k,i ∈ Z, |i|≤ m:
ket(Ui)= qik · Ui; ket(θm)= qm·k2
· U2mk · θm
114

Thus, we obtain the following:
Proposition 2.2. The A-module Γ(C∞
ˆS
, L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
) is topologicallyA-generated by the sections
ket(Ui · θm)= qm·k2+ik · U2mk+i · θm
where k,i ∈ Z, |i|≤ m.
(For instance, the case m = 1 of Proposition 2.2 is essentially stated in the discussion at
the beginning of Chapter III, §5.)
We will ultimately use Proposition 2.2 to compute the image in EˆS =( Gm)ˆS of
sections of L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
⊗OC∞
ˆS
Oχ
C∞
ˆS
for various characters χ ∈ Hom(Πn,(μn)S).
§3. Twisted Schottky-Weierstrass Zeta Functions
In this §, we generalize the discussion ofSchottky-Weierstrass zeta functionsof Chapter
III, §6, 7, to the “twisted” context of §2. We maintain the notation of §2.
First, let us recall the isogeny
E → ˜E
discussed in §2. This kernel of this isogeny is μn. Moreover, this isogeny may be com-
pactiﬁed to a morphism C → ˜C. Recall (Chapter III, §1) that the universal extension E†
of E is deﬁned by considering certain line bundles with connection on C. Given such a
line bundle with connection on C, by taking the norm of this line bundle (relative to the
ﬁnite morphism C → ˜C), we obtain a line bundle on ˜C; moreover, taking the trace of the
connection on the line bundle on C, we get a connection on the norm on this line bundle
on ˜C. Thus, by performing these operations, we obtain a push-forward homomorphism
E† → ˜E†
which covers (since taking the norm of the line bundle deﬁned by a divisor on E is the
same as taking the line bundle associated to the image of this divisor in ˜E) the given
isogeny E → ˜E. Moreover, since taking the trace of diﬀerentials onEˆS =( Gm)ˆS via what
amounts to the multiplication by n map (Gm)ˆS = EˆS → (Gm)ˆS = ˜EˆS on (Gm)ˆS induces
an isomorphism of the invariant diﬀerentials on EˆS onto the invariant diﬀerentials on ˜EˆS
(i.e., the trace of dU/U is n · dU/U = d(Un)/(Un)), it follows that the push-forward map
115

deﬁned above maps WE ⊆ E† (i.e., WE is what we called “ W”w h e nE was the only
elliptic curve under discussion) isomorphically onto W˜E ⊆ ˜E† . T h a ti st os a y ,w eh a v ea
commutative diagram
0 −→ WE −→ E† −→ E −→ 0
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
0 −→ W˜
E −→ ˜E† −→ ˜E −→ 0
where the vertical arrow on the left is an isomorphism, and
Ker(E† → ˜E† ) ∼= Ker(E → ˜E) ∼= μn
Next, we would like to consider thecanonical splittings κ : EˆS → E†
ˆS
, ˜κ : ˜EˆS → ˜E†
ˆS
of
Chapter III, §2, Theorem 2.1. Now I claim that
κ(Ker(E → ˜E)) ⊆ Ker(E† → ˜E† )
Indeed, since κ is a homomorphism, it follows that the image
Im(κ(Ker(E → ˜E))) ⊆ ˜E†
ˆS
is annihilated by n and vanishes when projected to ˜EˆS, hence is contained in (W˜E)ˆS.O n
the other hand, the image in ( W˜E)ˆS
∼= A1
ˆS
of any A-ﬂat group scheme annihilated by n
is necessarily trivial. Indeed, this may be checked (by A-ﬂatness) in characteristic zero,
where it is obvious. This completes the proof of the claim. Note that the claim then implies
that κ : EˆS → E†
ˆS
descends to a homomorphism ˜EˆS → ˜E†
ˆS
which splits the projection
˜E†
ˆS
→ ˜EˆS.S i n c e˜κ is the unique such homomorphism (cf. Chapter III, §2), it thus follows
that we have a commutative diagram:
EˆS
κ
−→ E†
ˆS⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
˜EˆS
˜κ
−→ ˜E†
ˆS
Next, we considerline bundles. For convenience,we assume that O has enough primes
inverted so that
Pic(O)= {1}
116

(Here, we use the well-known fact from elementary algebraic number theory that “Pic”
of the ring of integers of a number ﬁeld is a ﬁnite group , i.e., “the ﬁniteness of the class
group.”) Note that since Pic(O) is trivial, it follows immediately that Pic(A) is also trivial.
Now recall the line bundle
˜M
on ˜C.I f χ ∈ Hom(Πn,(μn)S), then we shall write
˜Mχ
˜E
def
= Oχ
˜E
⊗O˜E
( ˜M| ˜E)
Note that since C is regular,a n dC − E is of codimension 2 in C, it follows that the line
bundle ˜Mχ
˜E
|E extends (uniquely) to a line bundle ˜Mχ
C on C. Moreover, since E → ˜E
is a μn-torsor, we obtain an action of μn on ˜Mχ
C.S i n c eμn is of multiplicative type,
hence reductive (i.e., its representations split up into direct sums of representations by
characters), we thus obtain that the μn-invariant subspace
Γ(C, ˜Mχ
C)μn ⊆ Γ(C, ˜Mχ
C)
is a direct summand of theA-module Γ(C, ˜Mχ
C) (which, by Riemann-Roch, is a projective
A-module of rank n). Since, after one inverts q, this invariant subspace may be identiﬁed
with Γ(˜E, ˜Mχ
˜E
)⊗A A[q−1] (which, by Riemann-Roch, is a projectiveA[q−1]-module of rank
1), we thus obtain that this invariant subspace Γ(C, ˜Mχ
C)μn is a projective A-module of
rank 1. Since Pic(A) is trivial, we thus obtain that Γ(C, ˜Mχ
C)μn is a free A-module of rank
1. Thus, we may choose a generator sχ of this module, i.e.:
A · sχ =Γ (C, ˜Mχ
C)μn
Thus, if one pulls sχ back to C∞
ˆS
, we see that
sχ |C∞
ˆS
may be thought of as a topological A-linear combination
σχ
of the elements discussed in Proposition 2.2 which satisﬁes, for all points α of Zet × μn
(valued in some scheme),
α(σχ)= χ−1(α) · σχ
117

where the action ofα on the left-hand side is via the usual action ofZet ×μn on expressions
as in Proposition 2.2, and we regard the character χ as a character on Zet × μn via the
natural surjection Zet × μn → (Zet/n) × μn =Π n.
Next, let us recall the exact sequence
0 →O C →T C → τE |C → 0
of the discussion following Chapter III, Corollary 4.3. The extension class of this exact
sequence is precisely the torsor deﬁned by the universal extension E†
C → C.B y t h e
discussion above concerning the relationship between the universal extensionsE† and ˜E† ,
it follows that this exact sequence descends naturally to an exact sequence
0 →O ˜C → ˜T ˜C → τE |˜C → 0
Thus, we see that we obtain a natural action of μn on Γ(C, TC ⊗OC
˜Mχ
C). Then just
as in the discussion of sections of ˜Mχ, we obtain (by applying Riemann-Roch and the
reductiveness of μn) that the μn-invariant subspace
Γ(C, TC ⊗ ˜Mχ
C)μn ⊆ Γ(C, TC ⊗ ˜Mχ
C)
ﬁts into an exact sequence of A-modules:
0 → Γ(C, ˜Mχ
C)μn → Γ(C, TC ⊗ ˜Mχ
C)μn → Γ(C, ˜Mχ
C)μn ⊗A (A · U ∂
∂U) → 0
In particular, we may choose a section
Sχ ∈ Γ(C, TC ⊗ ˜Mχ
C)μn
whose image in Γ(C, ˜Mχ
C)μn ⊗A (A ·U ∂
∂U )i se q u a lt osχ ·U ∂
∂U . If we pull-back Sχ to C∞
ˆS
,
then we may think of S∞
χ as a section of TC ⊗L ⊗n
C∞
ˆS
which satisﬁes
α(S∞
χ )= χ(α)−1 ·S ∞
χ
for all points α of Zet × μn (valued in some scheme).
On the other hand, κ deﬁnes a section
κT ∈ Γ(C∞
ˆS , TC |C∞
ˆS
)
118

whose image in Γ(C∞
ˆS
,τE |C∞
ˆS
)i s U ∂
∂U .S i n c eκ descends to ˜κ (as discussed above), the
natural action of μn on κT is trivial. Moreover, by Chapter III, Theorem 5.6, it follows
that
1et(κT )= κT +1
In particular, the section
σχ · κT ∈ Γ(C∞
ˆS , L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
⊗OC TC)
satisﬁes
1et(σχ · κT )= χ(1et)−1 · σχ · (κT +1 ) ; α(σχ · κT )= χ(α)−1 · σχ · κT
(where α is a point of μn valued in some scheme).
Thus, if we form the diﬀerence
ζχ def
= S∞
χ − σχ · κT ∈ Γ(C∞
ˆS , L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
)
then we have:
1et(ζχ)= χ(1et)−1 · (ζχ − σχ); α(ζχ)= χ(α)−1 · ζχ
(where α is a point of μn valued in some scheme). Let us deﬁne
δχ(f)
def
= {χ(1et) · 1et(f)}− f
(Thus, formally,δχ(f ·g)= δχ(f) ·1et(g)+ f ·δ(g), where δ(g)=1 et(g) − g is as in Chapter
III, §6.) Then we have
δχ(ζχ)= −σχ
Note that if χ is the trivial character, n =2 ,a n d2 ∈O ×,t h e nζχ is simply (in the
notation of Chapter III, §5)
“( ζ+ C) · σ2”
for some C ∈ A.
119

Now we would like to generalize ζχ in precisely the way we generalized ζ in Chapter
III, §6. To do this, we would like to consider extension polynomials – i.e., sections of the
sheaf Ret
E†
C
of Chapter III, Proposition 6.1 – but this time (unlike in Chapter III, §6) with
coeﬃcients that are sections of L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
over C∞
ˆS
. In other words, we would like to consider
sections of Ret
E†
C
⊗OC L⊗n
C over C∞
ˆS
. Also, whereas before we considered Zet-invariant
extension polynomials, this time we would like to consider extension polynomials on which
Zet × μn acts via the character χ – i.e., polynomials which are (Zet × μn)-invariant when
considered as sections of Ret
E†
C
⊗OC (L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
)χ. Other than these formal changes, however,
the proofs proceed just as for Chapter III, §6, Lemma 6.3, Theorem 6.4. The end result is
the following:
Theorem 3.1. Let r be a nonnegative integer, and χ ∈ Hom(Πn,(μn)S). Then there
exists a (Zet × μn)-invariant extension polynomial
f =
r∑
i=0
ζχ
r−i · T[i]
(where the coeﬃcients lie in Γ(C∞
ˆS
,(L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
)χ)), such that ζχ
0 = σχ;
δχ(ζχ
r−i)+ δχ(ζχ
r−i−1)+ ζχ
r−i−1 =0
(for all i); and all the ζχ
j ∈ Γ(C∞
ˆS
,(L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
)χ) are μn-invariant. In particular, we have
δχ(ζχ
j )= −ζχ
j−1 + ζχ
j−2 − ... +( −1)j−1ζχ
1 +( −1)jζχ
0
(for all j). Finally, if ˆζχ
0 ,... , ˆζχ
r satisfy the same conditions as ζχ
0 ,... ,ζχ
r , then for each
j =0 ,... ,r ,
ζχ
j − ˆζχ
j = some A−linear combination of ζχ
0 ,... ,ζχ
j−1
(where A = O[[q]]).
Remark. Just as in the non-twisted case (cf. Chapter III, §6, Theorem 6.4), we may take
ζχ
1 = ζχ. Also, (just as in Chapter III, §6, Remark 2) everything we did here can also be
done in the complex analytic context.
120

Similarly, one may generalize the canonical Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functions of
Chapter III, §7, to the present twisted context, as follows. First, we assume for the
remainder of the § that O is a ﬁnite extension of Q. Then we deﬁne the operator δ∗ on
L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
by
f ↦→ δ∗(f)
def
= 1
n ·∇ (U ∂
∂U )(f)
where ∇ is the connection induced on L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
= L⊗2m
C∞
ˆS
by the connection on L⊗2
C∞
ˆS
of Chapter
III, Theorem 5.6; and U is the standard multiplicative coordinate on EˆS (as in §2). One
checks easily that the natural action of μn on δ∗ is trivial and that:
[δ∗,δχ]= χ(1et) · 1et
Also, just as in Chapter III, §7, we may also deﬁne a tautological connection (on the
universal extension), as well as a corresponding diﬀerential operator (δtaut)∗.T h u s ,b yt h e
same formal arguments as those used to derive Chapter III, Theorem 7.4, in Chapter III,
we obtain the following result:
Theorem 3.2. (Divided Power Twisted Canonical Schottky-Weierstrass Func-
tions) Let χ ∈ Hom(Π
n,(μn)S), ζPD,χ
0
def
= σχ ∈ Γ(C∞
ˆS
,(L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
)χ). Write (for r ∈ Z≥0)
ζPD,χ
r
def
= 1
r!(δ∗)rζPD,χ
0
(and let ζPD,χ
r
def
=0 if r< 0). Then δ∗(ζPD,χ
r )=( r+1) ·ζPD,χ
r+1 , (δχ)r(ζPD,χ
r )=( −1)r ·ζPD,χ
0
(if r ≥ 0);
δχ(ζPD,χ
r )= ∑r−1
i=0 (−1)i+r 1
(r−i)! ζPD,χ
i = −ζPD,χ
r−1 + 1
2 · ζPD,χ
r−2 +...+( −1)r · 1
r! · ζPD,χ
0
(for all r ∈ Z). Moreover, all of theζPD,χ
i (for i ∈ Z)a r eμn-invariant, and, in fact, theA-
submodule of Γ(C∞
ˆS
,(L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
)χ) generated byζPD,χ
0 ,... ,ζPD,χ
r is equal to theA-submodule of
μn-invariant sections of Γ(C∞
ˆS
,(L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
)χ) which are annihilated by (δχ)r+1.I np a r t i c u l a r ,
this submodule is equal to the A-submodule of Γ(C∞
ˆS
,(L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
)χ) generated by the functions
denoted “ζPD,χ
0 ,... ,ζPD,χ
r ” in Theorem 3.1. Finally, the polynomial
ζPD,χ
r [T]
def
=
r∑
i=0
ζPD,χ
i · Tr−i
(r − i)! = ζPD,χ
0 · Tr
r! + ζPD,χ
1 · T(r−1)
(r − 1)! +...+ ζPD,χ
r−1 · T + ζPD,χ
r
121

(∈ Γ(C∞
ˆS
,(L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
)χ[T]))i s (Zet × μn)-invariant relative to the natural action of Zet × μn
on C∞
ˆS
, (L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
)χ, and the action of Zet × μn on T given by 1et(T)= T +1 , α(T)= T
(∀α ∈ μn).
Remark. Just as was the case with Theorem 3.1, Theorem 3.2 also has acomplex analytic
version. We leave the routine details to the reader. Also, just as was the case for Chapter
III, Theorem 7.4, it is clear from the formula for δχ(ζPD,χ
r ) that the denominators that
occur are “essential” (i.e., they cannot be eliminated as in the case of Theorem 3.1 simply
by “redeﬁning the integral structure”).
Finally, just as in Chapter III, §7, we may also deﬁne the twisted version of binomial
canonical Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functions as follows. First, let us observe that there
is a unique integer i
χ satisfying −m ≤ iχ <m such that the monomials of Propostion
2.2, when considered as sections of (L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
)χ), are μn-invariant if and only if the integer i
(∈{ −m, −m+1 ,... ,0,... ,m − 1} – cf. Proposition 2.2) is equal to iχ.T h e nw eh a v et h e
following result:
Theorem 3.3. (Binomial Twisted Canonical Schottky-Weierstrass Functions)
Let χ ∈ Hom(Πn,(μn)S), ζBI,χ
0
def
= σχ ∈ Γ(C∞
ˆS
,(L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
)χ). Write (for r ∈ Z≥0) ζBI,χ
r
def
=
(δ∗−
iχ
n
r
)
(ζBI,χ
0 );
ζBI,χ
r [T]
def
=
(δ∗ + T − iχ
n
r
)
(ζBI,χ
0 )=
r∑
j=0
ζBI,χ
j · T[r−j]
Then the ζBI,χ
n , ζBI,χ
n [T]’s satisfy the properties of Theorem 3.1 (where we take “ ζχ
n ”o f
Theorem 6.4 to be ζBI,χ
n ;“ f” of Theorem 6.4 to beζBI,χ
n [T]). In particular, the ζBI,χ
n [T]’s
are Zet-invariant. Finally, the ζBI,χ
n [T]’s are integral overZ.
Proof. It remains only to verify integrality over Z. But this follows from observing that,
by the deﬁnition of iχ, ζBI,χ
0 may be thought of as a series in the monomials ket(Uiχ · θm)
(for k ∈ Z) of Proposition 2.2. Moreover, the operator δ∗ − iχ
n acts on the monomial
ket(Uiχ · θm)= qm·k2+iχ ·k · U2mk+iχ · θm
by multiplication by 1
n (2mk + iχ) − iχ
n = k. Thus, the operator
(δ∗−
iχ
n
r
)
acts on this
monomial by multiplication by
(k
n
)
∈ Z, as desired. ⃝
122

§4. Zhang’s Theory of Metrized Line Bundles
In this §, we review the theory of [Zh] in the case of elliptic curves. Roughly speaking,
this theory allows one to compute intersection numbers of vertical divisors in the special
ﬁber of an elliptic curve with multiplicative reduction using the techniques of classical har-
monic analysis on a circle . In fact, here, we will use a slight generalization of Zhang’s
1-dimensional theory to the 2-dimensional case, so in the following, we will give precise
deﬁnitions and statements of basic facts. The proofs, however, will be omitted since they
are entirely the same as those of [Zh].
Let R be a valuation ring whose valuation group is an ordered submodule of R.W e
denote its valuation
|−|
R : R → R
and assume that we are given an element π ∈ R such that |π|R = e−1, and all positive
rational powers of the ideal π · R exist (as ideals of R). In other words, we want to think
of the copy of R that contains the valuation group of R as being “ −R · log(π)” (where
log(π) is to be regarded as a formal symbol). We denote the quotient ﬁeld of R by F.
Let V be a ﬁnite dimensional F-vector space. Then we will refer to as a metric on V
any map
|−| V : V → R
such that: (i) |λ · v|V = |λ|R ·| v|V , for all λ ∈ R, v ∈ V ; (ii) |v + w|V ≤ max(|v|V , |w|V ),
for all v,w ∈ V ; (iii) the set
MV
def
= {v ∈ V || v|V ≤ 1}
is bounded (i.e., given any basis v1,... ,vn of V , there exists a λ ∈ R such that MV ⊆∑n
i=1 R · λ · vi). Thus, MV forms an R-submodule of V which is bounded, saturated —i n
the sense that
M =
⋂
r∈Q>0
(π−rM)
—a n d generates V over F. Conversely, given any bounded, saturated R-submodule M
of V which generates V over F, one can naturally deﬁne a metric |−| V on V such that
M = MV as follows: For any nonzero rational section v ∈ V ,w el e t
|v|V
def
= e−r0
123

where r0 ∈ R is the supremum of the set of rational numbers r such that the section
π−r · v ∈ M. In other words, metrics on V are equivalent to bounded, saturated R-
submodules of V that generate V over F. This makes it clear, for instance, how to deﬁne
tensor products of metrics. Indeed, the tensor product of |−| V , |−| W on V ⊗F W is the
metric corresponding to the saturation (i.e., the smallest saturated module containing the
given module) of the bounded R-submodule Image(MV ⊗R MW ) ⊆ V ⊗F W.
If dimF (V ) = 1, then a metric |−| V on V is completely determined by its value on
any ﬁxed nonzero element v ∈ V . Thus, it follows that the metrics onV naturally form an
(additive) torsor over R. Moreover, the metrics on theF-vector space F may be naturally
identiﬁed (by looking at the value of the metric on 1 ∈ F)w i t hR itself.
Next, let us return to the set-up of §2. Recall that we have a one-dimensional semi-
abelian variety
E → S
equipped with a compactiﬁcation C → S. Here, S =S p e c (A), A = O[[q]]. Now let (for
N ≥ 1 an integer)
AN
def
= A[q1/N]; A∞
def
=
⋃
N ≥1
AN ; SN
def
=S p e c (AN ); S∞
def
=S p e c (A∞ )
Thus, SN is a ﬁnite, ﬂat S-scheme, and S∞ is the projective limit of the SN ’s. Also, let
us write
US
def
=S p e c (A[q−1]) ⊆ S
and USN , US∞ , etc. for the inverse images inSN , S∞ ,e t c .o fUS. Note that E|US ×US USN
has a unique regular semi-stable model
CN → SN
over SN . We denote the complement of the nodes of CN by
EN → SN
Thus, the special ﬁber (i.e., the zero locus of q1/N)o f EN is a union ofN copies of (Gm)O.
Write
C∞
def
= lim
←−
CN → S∞ = lim
←−
SN
124

for the inverse limit of the CN → SN ,w h e r eN ranges over the multiplicative semigroup
of positive integers. Thus, note that we have natural open immersions
EN ×SN S∞ ↪→ C∞
If we take the union of these open subschemes ofC∞ over N, we obtain an open subscheme
E∞ ⊆ C∞
which has the structure of a smooth group scheme over S∞ .
Let us refer to the prime of A∞ generated by the qr for all positive rational numbers
r as the central prime of A∞ . The localization of A∞ at the central prime is a valuation
ring with value groupQ. For geometric objects over S∞ , we shall refer to the ﬁber of such
an object over the central prime of S∞ as the special, or central, ﬁber of the object.
Observe that the connected components of the special ﬁber of EN may be naturally
identiﬁed with
1
N Z/Z
Here, the Z should be thought of as “Z ·log(q)” (where log(q) is a formal symbol). Indeed,
just as in §2, C∞
ˆS
formed a Galois cover of C[n]
ˆS
with Galois group n · Zet such that the
(irreducible) components of the special ﬁber of C[n] could be naturally identiﬁed with
Zet/N · Zet, there exists a natural inﬁnite Galois cover of ( CN )ˆSN
with Galois group Z
(which is a blow-up of the pull-back to ˆSN of the Z-Galois cover C∞
ˆS
→ CˆS) such that the
components of the special ﬁber of CN may be identiﬁed with 1
N Z/Z, as desired. By taking
the limit over N, we thus obtain that the components of the special ﬁber of C∞ may be
identiﬁed with
Q/Z ⊆ R/Z = S1
In the following, we would like to do functional analysis on S1. To this end, we deﬁne
Func(S1)
to be the set of piecewise smooth continuous functions on S1, i.e., continuous functions
that are inﬁnitely diﬀerentiable, except at a ﬁnite number of points of S1.
A crucial ingredient of the theory of [Zh] is the notion of “ divisors on S1”( c f . [ Z h ] ,
§2.1). Let us write
125

Div(S1)
def
= Z[Q/Z]
for the set of ﬁnite formal sums of elements of Q/Z with Z-coeﬃcients. We will regard
such formal sums as divisors on S1.N e x t ,w el e t
Div(S1)
def
=D i v (S1) ⊕ Func(S1)
be the group of compactiﬁed divisors on S1. Given a compactiﬁed divisor D + g (i.e.,
D ∈ Div(S1), g ∈ Func(S1), we deﬁne the curvature of D + g to be
hD+g
def
= δD − Δ( g)
Here, δD is the delta distribution associated to the divisor D, i.e., if f ∈ Func(S1), and
D = ∑
i ci · pi (for ci ∈ Z; pi ∈ Q/Z), then
<δD,f >
def
=
∑
i
ci · f(pi)
while Δ( g) is the distribution obtained by applying the Laplacian operator Δt o g, i.e., if
f ∈ Func(S1), then
< Δ( g),f >
def
= −
∫
S1
f · ∂2g
∂θ2
(where ∂/∂θis the standard unit tangent vector on S1, i.e., the tangent vector whose
reciprocal dθsatisﬁes
∫
S1 dθ= 1). One also deﬁnes an intersection pairingon compactiﬁed
divisors on S1 by:
(D1 + g1,D2 + g2)
def
=<δD1 ,g2 > + <δD2 ,g1 > −
∫
S1
g1Δ( g2)
Next, we would like to consider line bundles on E∞ |US . First, if p denotes a prime of
the special ﬁber of E∞ , then we shall write
Op
for the completion of OE∞ at p,a n dKp for its quotient ﬁeld. Thus, Op is a valuation ring
with valuation group equal to Q (times “log( q)”). By the above discussion, such p are in
natural bijective correspondence with the set Q/Z.
126

Deﬁnition 4.1. We deﬁne a pre-metrized line bundle (L, |−| L) on E∞ t ob eap a i r
(L, |−| L) consisting of a line bundle L on E∞ |US , together with a set of metrics (as
deﬁned above)
|−| L = {| − | Lp }p
(where p ranges over all primes in the special ﬁber of E∞ ) for the one-dimensional Kp-
vector space Lp
def
= L⊗ OE∞ Kp.
We will call a pre-metrized line bundle ( L, |−| L)a metrized line bundle if for some
nonzero rational section φ of L over E∞ , the real-valued function deﬁned on Q/Z ⊆ S1 by
p ↦→− log(|φ|Lp)
is the restriction toQ/Z ⊆ S1 of a function inFunc(S1). We denote the group of metrized
line bundles on E∞ by Pic(E∞ ).
Remark 1. The deﬁnition of a metrized line bundle given here is slightly diﬀerent from that
of [Zh]. Nevertheless, the metrized line bundles that are ultimately dealt with in [Zh] (cf.
[Zh], §2.5) are precisely the sort deﬁned in Deﬁnition 4.1. In [Zh], however, such bundles
are not given an explicit name.
Remark 2. If
L is a line bundle (in the usual sense) on E∞ obtained by pull-back from a
line bundle on CN for some N, then the metrics |−| Lp given by letting the absolute value
of a generator of L at p be equal to 1 deﬁne on L the structure of a metrized line bundle.
Thus, the notion of a metrized line bundle on E∞ generalizes the notion of a line bundle
on E∞ obtained by pull-back from a line bundle on CN .
One also has a notion of compactiﬁed divisors on E∞ , corresponding to the notion of
a metrized line bundle. This group of compactiﬁed divisors is deﬁned by
Div(E∞ )
def
=D i v (E∞ |US ) ⊕ Func(S1)
(where “Div(E∞ |US )” is the usual group of Weil divisors on theUS-smooth schemeE∞ |US ).
Any divisor compactiﬁed divisor D+g on E∞ deﬁnes a metrized line bundle OE∞ (D+g)=
(L, |−| L) as follows: First of all, if D is a Weil divisor onE∞ |US , then taking the closures
of its irreducible components deﬁnes a Weil divisor D ⊆ E∞ on E∞ . Moreover, since
E∞ |US is quasi-compact, and E∞ is an inverse limit of regular schemes, it follows that D
is, in fact, a Cartier divisor (cf. the discussion of the morphism ρ below for more details).
Thus, we obtain a line bundle L on E∞ .L e t L be the restriction of L to E∞ |US .T h e ni t
127

remains to deﬁne, for each p ∈ Q/Z,am e t r i c|−| Lp on Lp. This metric is obtained by
letting generators of L at p have absolute value exp(−g(p)).
This correspondence D + g ↦→O E∞ (D + g) thus deﬁnes a surjection
Div(E∞ ) → Pic(E∞ )
Under this correspondence, if v ∈ 1
N Z/Z is a component in the special ﬁber of CN –w h i c h
thus deﬁnes a line bundle on CN – then the element of Pic(E∞ ) corresponding to this line
bundle (cf. Remark 2 above) is the image under the above surjection of the compactiﬁed
divisor g ∈ Func(S
1), where g is the piecewise linear function onS1 which is linear on the
complement of 1
N Z/Z,e q u a lt o1
N at v, and equal to 0 at all points of ( 1
N Z/Z)\{v}.
Next, we recall that one has a natural morphism
ρ:D i v (E∞ |US ) → Div(S1)
deﬁned as follows: To deﬁne ρ, it suﬃces to deﬁne ρ on each prime divisor in E∞ |US .
First, we set ρ to be 0 on all prime divisors which are not US-ﬂat .I f DUS ⊆ E∞ |US is
US-ﬂat ,t h e ns i n c eE∞ |US is an inverse limit of regular schemes, DUS will be a Cartier
divisor, hence, in particular, a US-scheme of ﬁnite presentation .T h u s ,DUS will arise by
base change from some divisor (DUS )N ⊆ EN |US .W r i t e
DN ⊆ CN
for the closure of (DUS )N in CN .L e t D′
N → DN be the normalization of DN .T h u s ,
D′
N → SN is ﬁnite and ﬂat (since SN is regular of dimension 2 and D′
N is normal, hence
has depth 2). Note that since the prime V (q1/N) ⊆ SN is regular of height 1 and has
characteristic zero residue ﬁeld, it follows (by Abhyankar’s Lemma) that the ramiﬁcation
of any ramiﬁed extension of the localization of O
SN at this prime may be annihilated by
adjoining roots of q to OSN . In particular, by taking N suﬃciently large, we may assume
that D′
N → SN is ´etale at all characteristic 0 primes of height 1. But then it follows from
the fact that CN is regular,t h a tno characteristic 0 height 1 prime of D′
N can map to a
node of CN . (Indeed, if R is a complete discrete valuation ring, and R′ is an unramiﬁed
extension of R (so R′ is also a complete discrete valuation ring), then anyR′-valued point
of R[[x, y]]/(xy − π)( w h e r ex, y are indeterminates, π is a uniformizer of R) would imply
the existence of an R-homomorphism R[[x, y]]/(xy − π) → R′ for which the images of x
and y lie in the maximal ideal mR′ . But this implies that the image of π in R′ lies in
m2
R′ , which contradicts the assumption that R′ is unramiﬁed over R.) Thus, there exists
a closed subscheme FN ⊆ DN of positive characteristic (i.e., such that FN ⊗ Q = ∅)s u c h
that DN \FN ⊆ EN . In particular, the closure D∞ of DUS in C∞ will also satisfy:
D∞ \F∞ ⊆ E∞
128

for some closed subscheme of positive characteristic F∞ ⊆ D∞ . For each characteristic 0
height 1 prime p of D′
N , let us write Comp(p) ∈ Q/Z for the irreducible component of the
special ﬁber E∞ that contains p. Then we deﬁne
ρ(DUS )
def
=
∑
p
[k(p): Q(O)] · Comp(p)
where p ranges over the characteristic 0 height one primes ofD′
N ; k(p) is the residue ﬁeld of
p; Q(O) is the quotient ﬁeld of O = AN /(q1/N); and “[ ∼:∼]” denotes the degree of a ﬁeld
extension. One checks easily that (for N suﬃciently large) this deﬁnition is independent
of N. This completes the deﬁnition of ρ.
Now that we have the morphismρ, we may deﬁne an intersection pairing onDiv(E∞ )
Div(E∞ ) ×′ Div(E∞ ) → Div(S∞ )
def
=D i v (S∞ ) ⊕ R
(where “ ×′” denotes pairs of compactiﬁed divisors D1 + g1, D2 + g2 such that the generic
points of the supports of D1 and D2 do not intersect) as follows: If D1, D2 are (Cartier)
divisors on E∞ |US such that the generic points of their supports do not intersect, then
taking the closures of their supports deﬁnes (Cartier) divisors D1,D2 on E∞ |US (cf. the
discussion above). Thus, we deﬁne
i(D1,D2) ∈ Div(S∞ )
as the usual intersection divisor D1 · D2 of D1 and D2. Then the intersection pairing for
compactiﬁed divisors is deﬁned by:
(D1 + g1,D2 + g2)
def
= i(D1,D2)+( ρ(D1)+ g1,ρ(D2)+ g2)
(where the second “(−, −)” is an intersection number of compactiﬁed divisors onS1, hence
∈ R).
Ultimately, we shall wish to do intersection theory not over “local objects” such as
S, but over, for instance, ( M1,0)Z or ﬁnite ﬂat coverings of ( M1,0)Z. In that sort of
global context, one can “glue together” the usual intersection theory over ( M1,0)Z with
the intersection theory of [Zh] to obtain aglobal intersection theoryfor line bundles on the
tautological log elliptic curve over coverings of (M1,0)Z which are equipped with a metric
“at inﬁnity.” We leave the “general nonsense” details to the reader.
Next, we would like to consider the curvatures of compactiﬁed divisors and metrized
line bundles. If D + g ∈ Div(E∞ ), then its curvature is deﬁned to be:
hD+g
def
= hρ(D)+g
129

(where the right-hand side is the curvature of the compactiﬁed divisorρ(D)+g ∈ Div(S1)).
If L = OE∞ (D + g) is a metrized line bundle, then we deﬁne the curvature of L to be:
hL
def
= hD+g
This deﬁnition is independent of the choice of D + g (cf. [Zh], §2.5). Note that in both
cases, the curvature is adistribution on S1. Its integral over S1 is given by (cf. [Zh], §2.5):
∫
S1
hL =d e g (L|US )
the degree of L on the generic ﬁber of E∞ . Intuitively speaking,
The value of the curvaturehL at a pointa ∈ Q/Z ⊆ S1 should be thought
of as the degree of the “restriction” ofL to the irreducible component of
the special ﬁber of C∞ corresponding to a.
Deﬁnition 4.2. A metrized line bundle or compactiﬁed divisor on E∞ is said to be
admissible if its curvature is the distribution given by a constant function on S1.
If a metrized line bundle L is admissible, then its curvature hL is, in fact, the constant
given by deg(L|US ).
Proposition 4.3. If L1 =( L1, |−| L1 ) and L2 =( L2, |−| L2 ) are metrized line bundles on
E∞ such that L1 ∼= L2 (as line bundles onE∞ |US )a n dhL1
= hL2
,t h e nL1 ∼= L2 ⊗OE∞ (C)
(as metrized line bundles), where C ∈ Func(S1) is a constant function. In particular, if
L1 =( L1, |−| L1 ) and L2 =( L2, |−| L2 ) are both admissible metrized line bundles on E∞
such that L1 ∼= L2 (as line bundles on E∞ |US ), then L1 ∼= L2 ⊗O E∞ (C) (as metrized line
bundles), where C ∈ Func(S1) is a constant function.
Proof. By considering L1 ⊗ L
−1
2 , it suﬃces to consider the case where L1 is the trivial
metrized line bundle. Then L2 is deﬁned by some compactiﬁed divisor g ∈ Func(S1).
Moreover, since hL1
=0 ,w eh a v ehg = −Δ( g) = 0, i.e., g is a continuous function on S1
whose second (distributional) derivative is zero. But it is easy to see that such a function
g is necessarily constant. ⃝
The notion of admissible metrized line bundles will be of fundamental importance
in the following discussion. Thus, it is of interest to construct admissible metrized line
bundles. For instance, given a horizontal (i.e., S∞ -ﬂat) divisor
130

D ⊆ E∞
one would like to know explicitly which function gD ∈ Func(S1) is the unique function
such that
(i)
∫
S1 gD =0
(ii) D+gD is admissible ⇐⇒ hD+gD = δρ(D)−Δ( gD)= δρD +∂2gD
∂θ2 is constant
Such a function gD will be called the Green’s functionfor D. Note that gD depends only
on the divisor ρ(D)o n S1. Thus, we will also write gρ(D) for gD.
Let D∈ Div(S1) be a divisor onS1. We would like to consider its Green functiongD.
The simplest case is the case where
D =[ 0 ]
i.e., the origin of [0] ∈ Q/Z ⊆ R/Z = S1. In this case, we will denote the associated
Green’s function by φ1.
Proposition 4.4. The Green’s function φ1 associated to the origin [0] is given, for
|θ|≤ 1
2,b y :
φ1(θ)= 1
2θ2 − 1
2 |θ| + 1
12
where θ is the standard coordinate on R (regarded as a covering of R/Z = S1). In
particular, φ1(θ) ∈ Q, for all θ ∈ Q. Alternatively, in terms of Fourier expansions on S1,
it is given by:
φ1(θ)= 1
4π2 ·
∑
0̸=n∈Z
1
n2 e2πinθ
In particular, φ1(0) = 1
12 (where we recall that we think of the values of φ1 as being in
“log(q)” units) is the maximum value attained by φ1,a n dφ1(1
2 )= − 1
24 is the minimum
value attained by φ1.
Proof. The polynomial representation of the Green’s functionφ1 is given in [Zh], §a.8, p.
193. The Fourier expansion may be derived as the unique (topological) linear combination
of e
2πin’s (forn ∈ Z) whose ﬁrst derivative is square integrable onS1 (hence is continuous),
whose value at 0 is 1
12 , and whose second derivative is the distribution deﬁned by
131

1 − δ[0] = −
∑
0̸=n∈Z
e2πin
on S1. The assertions concerning the maximum and minimum values of φ1 follow from
elementary calculus. ⃝
Corollary 4.5. Let a, b ∈ Q/Z. Then the Green’s functionφa,b associated to the divisor
a − b on S1 is the unique piecewise linear function on S1 which is linear (with respect to
θ)a w a yf r o ma and b, has second (distributional) derivative equal to δb − δa,a n di ss u c h
that
∫
S1 φa,b =0 . Moreover, φa,b has a global minimum at b and a global maximum at a.
Proof. This follows from the polynomial representation of Proposition 4.4 by direct com-
putation. ⃝
Corollary 4.6. Let N be a positive integer. Write φN for the Green’s function of the
divisor ∑N −1
i=0 [ i
N ]. Then the Fourier expansion of φN is given by:
φN (θ)= 1
4π2 · N ·
∑
0̸=n∈Z
1
n2 e2πinθ·N = 1
N φ1(N · θ)
In particular, φN (0) = 1
12·N (where we recall that we think of the values of φ1 as being
in “ log(q)” units) is the maximum value attained by φN,a n d φN ( 1
2N )= − 1
24N is the
minimum value attained by φ1.
Proof. The assertion concerning the Fourier expansion follows by adding up the translates
of the Fourier expansion of Proposition 4.4. The assertions concerning the maximum and
minimum values of φ
N follow by thinking of φN (θ)a s 1
N · φ1(N · θ). ⃝
Note that the use of Green’s functions allows one to construct metrized line bundles
with arbitrary prescribed restrictions to the special ﬁber of E∞ . Indeed, suppose we start
out with two horizontal divisorsD1,D2 ⊆ E∞ , both of degreed (on E∞ |US ). Then consider
the metrized line bundle
L
def
= OE∞ (D1 + gD1 − gD2 )
The restriction of L to a component of the special ﬁber of E∞ , which amounts to the
curvature hL of L evaluated at the point of S1 corresponding to that component, is given
(cf. Deﬁnition 4.2) by:
132

hL = δD1 − Δ( gD1 )+Δ ( gD2 )= hD1+gD1
− hD2+gD2
+ δD2
= d − d + δD2 = δD2
i.e., despite the fact that on the generic ﬁber E∞ |US of E∞ , L is just the line bundle
associated to the divisor D1, on the special ﬁber of E∞ , L looks as if it is the line bundle
associated to the divisor D2! This sort of metrized line bundle will play a key role in this
paper.
§5. Theta Groups and Metrized Line Bundles
We maintain the notation of §4. Let d be a positive integer; g ∈ Func(S1). In this §,
we would like to study the metrized line bundle on E∞ given by:
L
def
= OE∞ (d[e]+ g)
(where e ∈ E∞ (S∞ ) is the origin of the group object E∞ → S∞ ,a n d[e] is the horizontal
divisor deﬁned by its image). In particular, we will discuss the case where thetheta groups
of §1a c to nL, and compute (when the base is global) the degree of the push-forwardof L
to such a global base. We observe that although the issue of the behavior of theta groups
for degenerating elliptic curves is also discussed in [MB], it is the opinion of the author
that the use of Zhang’s theory of metrized line bundles substantially clariﬁes the behavior
of theta groups for degenerating elliptic curves.
Note ﬁrst of all that when we restrict to U
S, we are in the situation discussed in §1.
In particular, there is a theta group (GL)US associated to OE|US
(d ·[e]). The group scheme
(KL)US of d-torsion points of E|US ﬁts into an exact sequence
0 → (μd)US → (KL)US → (Z/dZ)US → 0
Although this exact sequence does not extend over S, if one base-changes to S∞ ,t h e ni t
extends naturally to an exact sequence of group schemes over S∞ :
0 → μd|S∞ → KL|S∞ → (Z/dZ)|S∞ → 0
where KL|S∞ ⊆ E∞ is a closed subgroup scheme. In fact, this exact sequence splits, so we
have a noncanonical isomorphism
KL|S∞
∼= {μd × (Z/dZ)}|S∞
In the following, we will denote KL|S∞ by
133

KL
Thus, the action ofKL on E∞ preserves the line bundleL|US . We would like to investigate
the extent to which it preserves L:
Proposition 5.1. The action of KL on E∞ preserves L if and only if translation by
1
d ∈ 1
dZ/Z ⊆ S1 on S1 preserves the curvature hL. We shall call such distributions on S1
d-invariant. For instance, if g = d · φ1 or g = d · φ1 − φd (cf. Corollary 4.6), then the
resulting curvature will be d-invariant.
Proof. The automorphisms of S1 induced by the action of KL on E∞ are precisely those
given by adding (integer) multiples of 1
d . Thus, the necessity of the condition hL(θ)=
hL(θ+ 1
d ) is clear. To see that it is suﬃcient, we reason as follows. First of all, since SN
is regular of dimension 2, it suﬃces to prove the result in characteristic 0, i.e., in the case
where O is a ﬁnite extension of Q.B u t t h e nKL is ´etale over S∞ , so it suﬃces to prove
that the “physical” automorphisms of E∞ induced by S∞ -rational points of KL preserve
L.L e t α be such an automorphism of E∞ that induces the automorphism θ ↦→ θ+ 1
d
on S1.T h e nLα
def
= α∗L is a metrized line bundle on E∞ which is isomorphic to L over
US. Moreover, by hypothesis, hL = hLα
. Thus, by Proposition 4.3, it follows that L
and Lα diﬀer by a constant C ∈ R. If this constant C ∈ Q, then multiplying by qC
shows that L ∼= Lα.I f n o t , t h e n s i n c eα has order d, it follows that C deﬁnes a class in
H1(Z/dZ,R/Q) = Hom(Z/dZ,R/Q) = 0. In order words, it follows from the fact that
the automorphism α has ﬁnite order (while R/Q is torsion-free) that C ∈ Q,s o L ∼= Lα,
as desired.
Thus, it remains to see that if g = d · φ1 or dφ1 − φd,t h e nhL is invariant under
θ ↦→ θ+ 1
d .B u ti fg = d · φ1,t h e nhL is a constant, so this is clear. Moreover, φd itself is
invariant underθ ↦→ θ+ 1
d , so adding Δ(φd) does not eﬀect the invariance underθ ↦→ θ+ 1
d .
This completes the proof. ⃝
Thus, if hL is d-invariant, then by considering pairs (α,ι), where α is a point of KL
and ι: T ∗
α L ∼= L (cf. §1), we obtain a theta group scheme
GL
over S∞ which extends (GL)US∞ . In particular, if f : E∞ → S∞ is the structure morphism,
then we may deﬁne the push-forward
f∗L
134

as the (quasi-coherent) OS-submodule of the rank d vector bundle (f |US )∗(L|US )o n US∞
consisting of sections whose absolute value is≤ 1 with respect to the|−| Lp for all p ∈ Q/Z.
Then f∗L is equipped with a natural action of GL.
Since it is not diﬃcult to construct a GL-module V which is a rankd vector bundle on
S∞ and on which Gm ⊆G L acts via the standard character (cf. Example 1.2), it follows
(cf. Theorem 1.1 of §1; [MB], Chapitre V, Corollaire 2.4.3) that
f∗L ∼= M⊗ OS∞ V
Here, M and its restriction MU to US∞ satisfy the following: MU is a line bundle on
US∞ ;a n dM is a quasi-coherent OS∞ -submodule of j∗MU (where j : US∞ ↪→ S∞ is the
natural inclusion). Note that since US∞ is quasi-compact and MU (being a line bundle) is
of ﬁnite presentation, it follows that MU arises as the pull-back of a line bundle on some
USN .T h u s ,MU extends to a line bundle M′ on S∞ . In fact, we may even assume that
M′ ⊆M (in such a way that M′|US = M|US ). Next, let us observe that M is bounded in
the sense that there exists some positive rational number C such that
M′ ⊆M⊆ q−C ·M ′
(Indeed, this follows from the fact that L itself is “bounded.”) Moreover, M has the
property that a rational section of M is integral over S∞ if and only if it is integral over
US∞ as well as at the central prime V ({qr }r∈Q>0 ) ⊆ S∞ . Since the localization of A∞ at
the central prime is a valuation ring with value group Q, it thus follows that M is of the
form
M =
⋂
r0 ≤r∈Q
q−r ·M ′
where r0 ∈ R≥0. In other words, the datum of M is equivalent to the datum of MU ,
together with a metric on MU at the central prime of S∞ .
Deﬁnition 5.2. We shall refer to as ametrized vector bundle on S∞ any pair (F, |−| F )
consisting of a vector bundle F on US∞ , together with a metric on F at the central prime
of S∞ .T h e rank of a metrized vector bundle (F, |−| F ) is deﬁned to be the rank of the
vector bundle F.
If (F, |−| F )i sa metrized vector bundle, then by considering the sheaf of (nonzero)
sections of F whose |−| F ≤ 1 at the central prime, we naturally obtain a quasi-coherent
OS∞ -module. Moreover, it follows from the discussion of metrics at the beginning of §4
– i.e., “metrics are equivalent to bounded, saturated submodules that generate over the
quotient ﬁeld” – that the metric |−|
F may be recovering from this quasi-coherent module.
135

In other words,metrized vector bundles may be thought of as a special kind of quasi-coherent
OS∞ -module.
On the other hand, any vector bundle F on S∞ (in the usual sense) naturally deﬁnes
a metrized vector bundle on S∞ (FU , |−| FU ) as follows: we let FU be the restriction of
F to US∞ ; |−| FU be the metric corresponding to the module of integral sections at the
central prime of S∞ . Thus, the (nonzero) sections of F may be recovered as those sections
of FU whose |−| FU ≤ 1 at the central prime. In particular, we see that the notion of a
metrized vector bundle on S∞ is a generalization of the usual notion of a vector bundle on
S∞ .
Corollary 5.3. Let L
def
= OE∞ (d[e]+ g) be a metrized line bundle onE∞ whose curvature
hL is d-invariant. Then the push-forward sheaf f∗L on S∞ has a natural structure of
metrized vector bundle of rank d on S∞ equipped with an action of GL. Moreover, there
exists an isomorphism
f∗L ∼= M⊗ OS∞ V
of GL-modules where M is a metrized line bundle on S∞ with trivial GL-action, and V is
a vector bundle (in the usual sense) onS∞ with GL-action on which Gm ⊆G L acts via the
standard character. Finally, if L is, in fact, a line bundle (i.e., is the metrized line bundle
arising from some line bundle on someCN), then f∗L (respectively, M) is a vector bundle
(respectively, line bundle) in the usual sense.
Now suppose (just for the remainder of this paragraph) that L is symmetric, i.e.,
preserved (up to isomorphism) by the automorphism of E∞ given by multiplication by
−1. It is easy to see that this is equivalent to the assertion that the curvaturehL satisﬁes
hL(−θ)= hL(θ) (cf. the proof of Proposition 5.1). Then (just as in the discussion of§1) the
automorphism [−1] of E∞ given by multiplication by −1 induces an automorphism of GL.
Thus, just as in §1 (cf. especially the discussion following Theorem 1.6), if α ∈ E∞ (S∞ )
is any S∞ -valued point, then we get an isomorphism (of metrized vector bundles on S∞ )
L|T ∗
α KL
∼= (L|α0 ) ⊗OK0
L
OKL
(where K0
L
def
= KL/2 · KL,a n d L|α0 is the line bundle on K0
L obtained by descending
L|T ∗α KL
). Thus, for instance, if d is odd, then we obtain atrivialization of the restriction of
L to the subscheme T ∗
α KL.I np a r t i c u l a r ,restriction to T ∗
α KL deﬁnes (by composing with
the above isomorphism) a morphism of metrized vector bundles on S∞ with GL-action:
f∗L→ (L|α0 ) ⊗OK0
L
OKL
136

In other words, this morphism allows us to think of global sections of L over E as being
(essentially) functions on the subscheme T ∗
α KL. These functions may thus be thought of
as a sort of “metrized” or “Zhang-theoretic” version of the algebraic theta functions of
[Mumf1,2,3].
The following standard line bundles will be important in this paper, so we give them
explicit names. First, let us write
φev
d (θ)
def
= φd(θ+ 1
2d)
(notation as in Corollary 4.6). In the following, the objects with a superscript “ev” (for
“even”) will be important in the case when d is even. Nevertheless, all the deﬁnitions (of
both the objects with a superscript “ev” and the objects without a superscript “ev”) may
be made regardless of whether d is even or odd. Let
g
st
def
= d · φ1 − φd; gev
st
def
= d · φ1 − φev
d
(notation as in Corollary 4.6). Write
Lst
def
= OE∞ (d[e]+ gst); L
ev
st
def
= OE∞ (d[e]+ gev
st )
In other words (cf. the discussion at the end of §4), Lst (respectively, L
ev
st ) is the metrized
line bundle whose restriction to the special ﬁber of C∞ looks like the divisor
d−1∑
i=0
[ i
d] (respectively ,
d−1∑
i=0
[( 1
2d)+( i
d)] )
In particular, it is easy to see that if one takes a point α ∈ KL(S∞ ) whose image
under the projection KL → (Z/dZ)i s1 ∈ Z/dZ,a n dap o i n tβ ∈ E∞ (S∞ ) such that
2 · β = α, then we have the following:
Lemma 5.4. If d is odd,t h e nLst ∼= OE∞ (∑d−1
i=0 [i · α]).I f d is even,t h e nL
ev
st ∼=
OE∞ (∑d−1
i=0 [β + i · α]).
Proof. Indeed, one calculates easily that both sides are isomorphic generically and have
the same curvatures. (Note here that in the case ofd even, if one does not shift byβ,t h e n
both sides will not even be isomorphic generically. Indeed, they will diﬀer generically by a
line bundle of order precisely 2.) Thus, we conclude by Proposition 4.3 that the two sides
diﬀer by some O
E∞ (C), for C ∈ R a constant. But now observe (cf. Proposition 4.4) that
gst (respectively, gev
st )t a k e srational values onQ/Z. On the other hand, for any irreducible
component p of the special ﬁber of E∞ , the order ordp at p of a rational function on E∞
137

whose divisor on E∞ |US is d[e] − ∑d−1
i=0 [i · α] (respectively, d[e] − ∑d−1
i=0 [β + i · α]) lies in
Q. Thus, it follows that C may be taken to be in Q, hence (by multiplying by qC)i tm a y
be taken to be 0. Thus, the two metrized line bundles are isomorphic, as desired. ⃝
Note, in particular, that if d is odd (respectively, even), then there exists a section s
of f∗Lst (respectively, f∗L
ev
st ) whose order ordp at any prime p ∈ Q/Z ⊆ S1 is precisely 0.
Indeed, such an s is given by applying the isomorphism of Lemma 5.4 to the section given
by the natural inclusion
OCd ⊆O Cd (
d−1∑
i=0
[i · α]) (respectively , OCd ⊆O Cd (
d−1∑
i=0
[β + i · α]))
It is clear that this section is nonzero at all the nodes ofCd, hence at every primep ∈ Q/Z,
as desired.
Lemma 5.5. Suppose that L = OE∞ (d[e]+ g),w h e r eg = gst + ψ (respectively,
g = gev
st + ψ)i f d is odd (respectively, even), and ψ ∈ Func(S1) is ≥ 0 and d-invariant
on S1. Suppose, moreover, that ψ vanishes at some point of Q/Z. Then the natural
identiﬁcation between f∗L and f∗Lst (respectively, f∗L
ev
st ) over US∞ extends to an equality
f∗L = f∗Lst (resp f∗L = f∗L
ev
st )
over S∞ .
Proof. To simplify notation, we assume in this proof that d is odd. (The even case is
entirely similar.) Now note that because ψ is d-invariant, it follows that GL acts on both
f∗L and f∗Lst. Thus, (cf. Corollary 5.3) it follows that for some r ∈ R,w eh a v e :
f∗L = q−r · f∗Lst
(i.e., the metrics on the two sides diﬀer by a factor of er). Since ψ ≥ 0, it follows that
r ≥ 0. Suppose that r> 0. Then if s is any section of f∗Lst, then there exists a rational
number ϵ> 0 such that q−ϵ · s forms an integral section of f∗L. Now suppose that ψ
vanishes at the point p of Q/Z. By the preceding discussion, there exists an s such that s
does not vanish (as a section of Lst)a t p.T h u s ,q−ϵ · s does not deﬁne an integral section
of Lst at p. On the other hand, since ψ(p) = 0, it follows that Lst and L have the same
integral structure at p.T h u s ,q−ϵ · s is not integral for L at p – a contradiction. This
completes the proof. ⃝
138

Theorem 5.6. Suppose that L = OE∞ (d[e]+ g),w h e r eg = gst + ψ (respectively, g =
gev
st + ψ)i f d is odd (respectively, even), andψ ∈ Func(S1) is d-invariant on S1.L e t
r0
def
=i n f
α∈S1
ψ(α)
Then the natural identiﬁcation between f∗L and f∗Lst (respectively, f∗L
ev
st ) over US∞ ex-
tends to an equality
f∗L = q−r0 · f∗Lst (respectively,f ∗L = q−r0 · f∗L
ev
st )
(i.e., the metric on f∗L is e−r0 times the metric on f∗Lst (respectively, f∗L
ev
st )) over S∞ .
Proof. For simplicity, we assume thatd is odd. First, consider the case where r0 ∈ Q and
there exists an α ∈ Q/Z such that ψ(α)= r0. Then by multiplying through by qr0 we see
that we reduce to the case r0 = 0. Moreover, the hypotheses of Lemma 5.5 are satisﬁed,
so we see that the result follows from Lemma 5.5. This completes the case where r0 ∈ Q
and ∃α ∈ Q/Z such that ψ(α)= r0.
To handle the general case, one simply approximates ψ by piecewise linear functions
ψi in Func(S1) which satisfy the hypotheses of the preceding paragraph. As ψi → ψ,i t
is clear that the metric on the resulting f∗Li converges to the metric on the original f∗L
(corresponding to ψ). This completes the proof. ⃝
Corollary 5.7. Suppose that L = OE∞ (d[e]+ d · φ1). Then we have (on S∞ )
f∗L = q
1
24d · f∗Lst (respectively,f ∗L = q
1
24d · f∗L
ev
st )
if d is odd (respectively, even).
Proof. For simplicity, we assume that d is odd.T h e n w e h a v eψ
def
= d · φ1 − gst = φd.
Moreover, by Corollary 4.6, the r0 (as in Theorem 5.6) for this ψ is equal to − 1
24d .T h u s
Corollary 5.7 follows from Theorem 5.6. ⃝
Next, we would like to switch gears, and consider the following situation. Suppose
that we are given a ﬁnite ﬂat covering
B → (M1,0)Z
which is ´etale over (M1,1)Q (i.e., away from the divisor at inﬁnity and ﬁnite primes). For
simplicity, we will also assume that B is regular, and that the completion of B at the
139

inverse image of the divisor at inﬁnity of ( M1,0)Z is a disjoint union of “ SN ’s” as in the
above discussion (for some appropriate N and base ring O). Let us write
IB
for the set of connected components of this union. Thus, for each ι ∈I B,w eh a v ea
completion Bι ∼= SNι,w h e r eSNι is understood to be over a base ring Oι.L e t
EB ⊆ CB → B
be the tautological log elliptic curveover B. Also, let us write UB ⊆ B for the complement
of the divisor at inﬁnity of B. By gluing together EB |UB and (E∞ )ι at each ι,w et h u s
obtain a smooth group scheme
E∞ ,B → B∞
over B∞ . (Thus, strictly speaking, B∞ is an algebraic stack in the ﬁnite, ﬂat topology .)
Then let us observe that one can glue together the theory discussed above over “ S”
with the usual theory of line bundles and vector bundles on EB and B to obtain a theory
of metrized line bundles on E∞ ,B and metrized vector bundles on B∞ . Indeed, we shall
not write out the routine details, but the point is that a metrized line bundle on E∞ ,B is
a line bundle on E∞ ,B |UB , together with a metric on the pull-back of this line bundle to
each E∞ ,B |US∞ ,ι (where we use the notation “ US∞ ,ι” relative to the understanding that
each Bι ∼= SNι has its associated US∞ ,ι ⊆ S∞ ,ι → SNι, etc.). Similarly, a metrized vector
bundle on B∞ is a vector bundle on UB, together with a metric on the pull-backs of this
vector bundle to each US∞ ,ι.
Thus, if we are given, for each ι∈I B, a function
gι ∈ Func(S1
ι)
then we may form a metrized line bundle
LB
def
= OE∞ ,B (d[e]+
∑
ι
gι)
in the obvious way. If we then push-forward this line bundle via fB : E∞ ,B → B∞ ,w e
obtain a metrized vector bundle
(fB)∗LB
whose local structure was studied in Corollary 5.3 and Theorem 5.6 above. In particular,
let us note that it makes sense to speak of the degree of a metrized vector bundle on B∞ .
140

This degree will, in general, be a real number. There are many ways that one can deﬁne
this degree. For instance, one may deﬁne it as the degree of the metrized line bundle
which is the determinant of the given metrized vector bundle. Thus, it suﬃces to deﬁne
the degree of a metrized line bundle onB
∞ . But a metrized line bundle on B∞ can easily
be seen to be equivalent (up to torsion) to an element of Pic(B) ⊗Z R. Thus, the degree
of a metrized line bundle may be deﬁned by tensoring (over Z with R) the usual degree
map
Pic(B) → Pic(BQ) → Z
on the smooth proper curve BQ. Here, because ( M1,0)Z is an algebraic stack, and B is a
covering of this stack, it is each to get confused about “what units” the degree is measured
in. In this paper, we adopt the convention of expressing all degrees in “ log(q)” units. In
other words, in these units, the degree of the divisor at inﬁnity of (
M1,0)Z is equal to 1.
Theorem 5.8. Let d be an odd (respectively, even) positive integer, and suppose that we
are given functions
gι ∈ Func(S1
ι)
for each ι∈I B such that ψι
def
= gι − (gst)ι (respectively, ψι
def
= gι − (gev
st )ι)i s d-invariant.
Let
rι
def
=i n f
α∈S1ι
ψι(α)
and
LB
def
= OE∞ ,B (d[e]+
∑
ι
gι);
(Lst)B
def
= OE∞ ,B (d[e]+
∑
ι
(gst)ι) (respectively , (L
ev
st )B
def
= OE∞ ,B (d[e]+
∑
ι
(gev
st )ι))
Then the natural identiﬁcation of push-forwards between (fB)∗LB and (fB)∗(Lst)B (re-
spectively, (fB)∗(L
ev
st )B) over UB extends to an equality
(fB)∗LB =(
∏
ι
q−rι
ι ) · (fB)∗(Lst)B
141

(respectively, (fB)∗LB =(
∏
ι
q−rι
ι ) · (fB)∗(L
ev
st )B )
(i.e., the metric on (fB)∗LB at ιis e−rι times the metric on (fB)∗(Lst)B (respectively,
(fB)∗(L
ev
st )B)) over S∞ . Moreover, we have
deg((fB)∗LB)= − 1
24(d − 1) +d ·
∑
ι
rι
where the degree is in “log(q)” units.
Proof. The assertion concerning integral structures is a formal consequence of Theorem
5.6. Moreover, this assertion concerning integral structures allows one to immediately
reduce the assertion concerning degrees to the “standard cases” of (
Lst)B,( L
ev
st )B. In these
cases, the assertion concerning the degree is an immediate consequence of Grothendieck-
Riemann-Roch. We will carry out this computation in the following paragraph. Before
doing this, however, we note that when working with metrized line bundles, one does
not necessarily get the correct answer if one applies Grothendieck-Riemann-Roch to an
arbitrary metrized line bundle, since for an arbitrary metrized line bundle, “ R
1(fB)∗”i s
not well-deﬁned (i.e., one might get various “analytic torsion eﬀects”). This is why we
reduced to the “standard cases” ( Lst)B,( L
ev
st )B which are (by Lemma 5.4), in fact, line
bundles in the usual sense (whose R1(fB)∗ is zero) over any covering of ( M1,0)Z over
which the d-torsion points of E∞ ,B become rational.
Let us ﬁrst treat the case of d odd. The case of d even is quite similar, and we will
remark at the end of the proof what must be modiﬁed in this case.
By Grothendieck-Riemann-Roch, we have
deg((fB)∗LB)=d e g (R(fCB )∗OCB )+ 1
2[LB] · ([LB] − [ωE])
(where fCB : CB → B is the structure morphism; we take LB
def
=( Lst)B; and we use
brackets “[ −]” to denote the Chern class of a line bundle). Here, ωE denotes the line
bundle on B given by considering the invariant diﬀerentials on EB. Then Serre duality
gives:
deg(R(fCB )∗OCB )=d e g (ωE)
Next, we compute the various intersection numbers that appear by using the intersection
theory of compactiﬁed divisors reviewed in §4. First of all, since ωE is a line bundle on B
(as opposed to CB), and ω⊗12
E is well-known to be isomorphic to the line bundle associated
to the divisor at inﬁnity, we have
142

[LB] · [ωE]= d · deg(ωE)= d
12
Next, we have
[LB] · [LB]= d · [LB] · [e]+
∫
S1
gst · hLst
On the other hand,
[LB] · [e]= d · [e]2 + gst(0) = −d · deg(ωE)+ d · φ1(0) − φd(0)
= −d · ( 1
12)+( d − 1
d) · 1
12 = − 1
12d
while
∫
S1
gst · hLst
=
d−1∑
i=0
gst( i
d)= d · φd(0) − d · φd(0) = 0
Thus, we obtain that [LB]2 = − 1
12 ,s o
deg((fB)∗LB)= 1
2 · (2 − 1 − d) · 1
12 = − 1
24(d − 1)
as desired.
Finally, we consider the case ofd even. In this case, we take LB
def
=( L
ev
st )B.I ti st h e n
immediate that
[LB] · [ωE]= d
12
(just as in the odd case). Thus the only intersection number that remains to be computed
is [LB]2.
We have
[LB] · [LB]= d · [LB] · [e]+
∫
S1
gev
st · hL
ev
st
Moreover,
143

[LB] · [e]= d · [e]2 + gev
st (0) = −d · deg(ωE)+ d · φ1(0) − φev
d (0)
= −d · deg(ωE)+ d · φ1(0) − φd( 1
2d)
= −d · ( 1
12)+( d + 1
2d) · 1
12 = 1
24d
while
∫
S1
gev
st · hL
ev
st
=
d−1∑
i=0
gev
st ( 1
2d + i
d)
= d · φd( 1
2d) − d · φd(0) = φ1(1
2) − φ1(0) = − 1
24 − 1
12
Thus, [LB]2 = d·( 1
24d )− 1
24 − 1
12 = − 1
12 (just as in the odd case), as desired. This completes
the proof in the even case. ⃝
Bibliography
[FC] G. Faltings and C.-L. Chai, Degenerations of Abelian Varieties, Springer (1990).
[KM] N. Katz and B. Mazur, Arithmetic Moduli of Elliptic Curves, Annals of Mathematics
Studies 108, Princeton University Press (1985).
[MB] L. Moret-Bailly, Pinceaux de vari´et´es ab´eliennes,A s t ´erisque 129, Soc. Math. France
(1985).
[Mumf1,2,3] D. Mumford, On the equations deﬁning abelian varieties I, II, III, Invent. Math. 1
(1966), pp. 287-354; 2 (1967), pp. 71-135; 3 (1967), pp. 215-244.
[Mumf4] D. Mumford, Abelian Varieties, Oxford University Press (1974).
[Mumf5] D. Mumford, An Analytic Construction of Degenerating Abelian Varieties over Com-
plete Rings, Appendix to [FC].
[Zh] S. Zhang, Admissible pairing on a curve, Invent. Math. 112 (1993), pp. 171-193.
144

Chapter V: The Evaluation Map
§0. Introduction
In this Chapter, we prepare for the proof of the Comparison Isomorphism (which is
the main topic of this paper) in Chapter VI by studying the morphism which is to be the
“comparison isomorphism.” We refer to this morphism as theevaluation map. Our study of
the evaluation map consists of several parts. First, we must set up the notation and deﬁne
the evaluation map. This is done in §1, 2, 3. The evaluation map essentially consists
of restricting global sections of a certain natural metrized line bundle on the universal
extension of an elliptic curve to the torsion points of the elliptic curve .I n §1, we discuss
the deﬁnition of the natural metrized line bundles that we use, and in §2, we construct
and study the elementary properties of the “evaluation map.” In §3, we observe that
the “´etale-integral structures”deﬁned in Chapter III, §6, are deﬁned for arbitrary elliptic
curves (i.e., not just for degenerating elliptic curves, as in the discussion of Chapter III,§6),
and, moreover, that the functions in these ´etale-integral structures assume integral values
at the torsion points appearing in the deﬁnition of the evaluation map. This integrality
property will be important in the proof of the comparison isomorphism in Chapter VI.
After we have deﬁned the evaluation map, we commence our study of the extent to
which it is an isomorphism .W e b e g i n , i n§4, by studying the extent to which a certain
version of the evaluation map deﬁned for degenerating elliptic curves is an isomorphism
modulo various powers of theq-parameter. This essentially amounts to studying the extent
to which the twisted Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functions of Chapter IV, §3, satisfy linear
relations modulo various powers of the q-parameter. It turns out that the calculations of
linear relations that we carry out in this § will yield the key technical machinery behind
the main result of this paper. Next, in §5, we study the determinant of the evaluation map
in the case when the base of the spectrum of an algebraically closed ﬁeld. We then use the
theory of §5 to determine, in §6, precisely when the evaluation map is an isomorphism for
“suﬃciently generic” elliptic curves.
§1. Construction of Certain Metrized Line Bundles
In this §, we continue the discussion of Chapter IV,§4,5, on metrized line bundles. In
particular, we introduce certain speciﬁc metrized line bundles which we will need in order
to construct the evaluation maps of §2 below. These metrized line bundles
L are natural
in the sense that (it is not diﬃcult to show that) they may be uniquely characterized
(up to tensor product with a line bundle pulled back from the base) by the following two
conditions:
145

(i.) They are symmetric up to torsion (i.e., the pull-back of L via the
“multiplication by −1” map of an elliptic curve diﬀers fromL by a line
bundle which deﬁnes a torsion element of the Picard group), of relative
degree d.
(ii.) Their curvatures (at inﬁnity) are invariant with respect to and
“concentrated at” (in the sense of “delta functions”) thed-torsion points
to which we will restrict them when we consider “evaluation maps” in
§2.
Condition (ii.) is natural considering that the main purpose of constructing these line
bundles is to restrict them (and their sections) to the subscheme of d-torsion points of
an elliptic curve . In fact, the “concentrated at” part of Condition (ii.) is inessential in
the sense that, by Chapter IV, Theorem 5.6, even if the curvature is not concentrated at
the d-torsion points, the push-forward of the metrized line bundle – which is what we are
ultimately interested in – is the same as that of the “maximal metrized subsheaf inside
the original line bundle among those subsheaves which are concentrated at the d-torsion
points.”
Let m ≥ 1 be an integer. We would like to consider the moduli of pairs
(E → S, η∈ E(S))
where E → S is an elliptic curve, and η ∈ E(S) generates a cyclic subgroup of orderm in
E.O v e rZ[
1
m ], there is no problem in deﬁning an algebraic stack of such pairs. Moreover,
it follows from the theory of [KM], Chapter 5 (cf. especially Theorem 5.1.1), that this
stack extends (uniquely) to a ﬁnite, ﬂat covering
B → (
M1,0)Z
of proper algebraic stacks overZ which is ´etale overZ[ 1
m ] away from the divisor at inﬁnity;
near inﬁnity, is obtained by adjoining someq
1
r ,w h e r er divides m to the ring of integers in
some cyclotomic extension of Q; and, at primes dividing m, parametrizes “points of exact
order m.” Moreover, the stackB is regular.I np a r t i c u l a r ,B satisﬁes the hypotheses of the
discussion following Chapter IV, Corollary 5.7.
Next, let d be a positive integer. Then let us recall the metrized line bundles
(Lst)B
def
= OE∞ ,B (d[e]+
∑
ι
(gst)ι)
(L
ev
st )B
def
= OE∞ ,B (d[e]+
∑
ι
(gev
st )ι)
146

(where e is the origin of the group object fB : E∞ ,B → B∞ ; ιranges over the connected
components of the divisor at inﬁnity of B;a n dgst = d · φ1 − φd, gev
st = d · φ1 − φev
d are the
“standard Green’s functions” studied in Chapter IV, §4,5) of Chapter IV, Theorem 5.8.
Recall from the theory of Chapter IV, §4,5 (especially Chapter IV, Lemma 5.4), that on
each S1
ι (i.e., the “limit” of the set of irreducible components of the semi-stable models
over the component at inﬁnity ι), (Lst)B (respectively, (L
ev
st )B) looks like the (line bundle
associated to) the divisor
d−1∑
i=0
[ i
d] (respectively ,
d−1∑
i=0
[( 1
2d)+( i
d)] )
on S1
ι. Finally, in Chapter IV, Theorem 5.8, we showed that ifd is odd (respectively, even),
then
deg((fB)∗(Lst)B)= − 1
24(d − 1) (respectively , deg((fB)∗(L
ev
st )B)= − 1
24(d − 1) )
in “log( q)” units.
Next, let us observe that from the deﬁnition of the moduli stack B,w eh a v eatauto-
logical m-torsion point
η ∈ E∞ ,B(B)
For each ι, one then has a divisor
ρι(η) ∈ Div(S1
ι)
given by the unique point of ( Q/Z)ι ⊆ S1
ι deﬁned by η at ι. Let us denote this unique
point by ηι ∈ (Q/Z)ι ⊆ S1
ι.T h u s ,ρι(η)=[ ηι]. Now, if d is odd (respectively, even), then
let us consider the divisor
( d−1∑
i=0
[ηι+ i
d]
)
−
(d−1∑
i=0
[ i
d]
)
∈ Div(S1
ι)
(respectively,
( d−1∑
i=0
[ηι+ 1
2d + i
d]
)
−
( d−1∑
i=0
[ i
d]
)
∈ Div(S1
ι))
Let us write φηι (respectively, φev
ηι ) for the Green’s function associated to this divisor(cf.
the discussion preceding Chapter IV, Proposition 4.4). Thus, Δ( φηι)= − ∂2φηι
∂θ2 (where
147

θ is the standard coordinate on S1
ι) is equal to the delta distribution associated to this
divisor. Moreover, by Chapter IV, Corollary 4.5, the function φηι is piecewise linear on
S1
ι, d-invariant (i.e., φηι(θ+ 1
d )= φηι(θ)), and attains its maximum at the points ηι+ i
d
(respectively, ηι+ 1
2d + i
d ), and its minimum at the points i
d ,f o ri =0 ,... ,d − 1. Indeed,
it follows immediately from the deﬁnitions that
φηι(θ)= 1
dφd·ηι,0(d · θ) (respectively ,φ ev
ηι (θ)= 1
dφd·ηι+1
2 ,0(d · θ))
where φ??,0(θ) is the function considered in Chapter IV, Corollary 4.5. Let us deﬁne
ψηι(θ)
def
= φηι(θ) − φηι(0) (respectively ,ψ ev
ηι (θ)
def
= φev
ηι (θ) − φev
ηι (0) )
Thus, ψηι ≥ 0 (respectively, ψev
ηι ≥ 0) on S1
ι; ψηι(0) = 0 (respectively,ψev
ηι (0) = 0).
We are now ready to deﬁne the metrized line bundles which are the main topic of the
present §.L e t
(Lst,η)B
def
= {T ∗
η ((Lst)B)}⊗ OE∞ ,B
OE∞ ,B (
∑
ι
ψηι)
(respectively, (L
ev
st,η)B
def
= {T ∗
η ((L
ev
st )B)}⊗ OE∞ ,B
OE∞ ,B (
∑
ι
ψev
ηι ))
(where Tη : E∞ ,B → E∞ ,B is the morphism given by translation by η ∈ E∞ ,B(B)). Note
that the curvature of this metrized line bundle at ιis given by:
δ(∑d−1
i=0 [ηι+ i
d ]
) − Δ( ψηι)= δ(∑d−1
i=0 [ i
d ]
)
(respectively,δ (∑d−1
i=0 [ηι+ 1
2d + i
d ]
) − Δ( ψev
ηι )= δ(∑d−1
i=0 [ i
d ]
) )
That is to say, although, over US, Lst,η (respectively, L
ev
st,η) is “twisted,” i.e., diﬀers from
(Lst)B (respectively,(L
ev
st,η)B) by translation byη, “metrically speaking” (i.e., in the special
ﬁbers at inﬁnity) it looks as though it was never twisted by translation by η (respectively,
or even by the “ 1
2d’s” on theS1
ι’s at inﬁnity).
Now Chapter IV, Theorems 5.6, 5.8, imply the following:
Proposition 1.1. If d is odd (respectively, even), then the automorphism ofE∞ ,B given
by translation by η induces a natural equality:
148

(fB)∗(Lst,η)B =( fB)∗(Lst)B (respectively, (fB)∗(L
ev
st,η)B =( fB)∗(L
ev
st )B )
of metrized vector bundles on B∞ .I n p a r t i c u l a r ,deg((fB)∗(Lst,η)B)= − 1
24 (d − 1) (re-
spectively, deg((fB)∗(L
ev
st,η)B)= − 1
24 (d − 1)).
Remark. We note here, for future reference, that Proposition 1.1 implies that
d ·
{
− 1
12(
d−1∑
i=0
i)+d e g ( (fB)∗(Lst,η)B)
}
= −d · 1
24 {d(d − 1) + (d − 1)} = − 1
24d(d2 − 1)
if d is odd (respectively,
d ·
{
− 1
12(
d−1∑
i=0
i)+d e g ( (fB)∗(L
ev
st,η)B)
}
= −d · 1
24 {d(d − 1) + (d − 1)} = − 1
24d(d2 − 1)
if d is even). This computation will be of fundamental importance in the proof of the
comparison isomorphism in Chapter VI.
Note, moreover, that since theψηι’s ared-invariant, one can glue together the theories
of theta groups discussed in Chapter IV, §1, and Chapter IV, §5, to obtain a theta group
G(Lst)B
= G(Lst,η )B
(if d is odd) which ﬁts into an exact sequence
1 → (Gm)B →G (Lst)B
= G(Lst,η )B
→ K(Lst)B
= K(Lst,η )B
→ 1
where K(Lst)B
= K(Lst,η )B
is the kernel of multiplication by d on E∞ ,B. Naturally, the
equality of metrized vector bundles in Proposition 1.1 is, in fact, an equality of modules
over this group scheme G(Lst)B
= G(Lst,η )B
. Similar statements hold for ( L
ev
st )B,( L
ev
st,η
)B,
if d is even.
Next, let us compute some intersection numbers (cf. the theory of Chapter IV, §4,5).
Proposition 1.2. Suppose that τ is any d-torsion point ∈ E∞ ,B(T) (i.e., d · τ=0 ) over
some B-scheme T,w h e r eT → B is a ﬁnite, ﬂat covering that satisﬁes the same hypotheses
as B (i.e., the hypotheses in the discussion following Chapter IV, Corollary 5.7). Suppose
that d is odd; then we have
149

[τ] · (Lst,η)B = − 1
d
∑
ι
φ1(−d · ηι)
i.e.,
[τ] · (Lst,η)B =0
if m does not divide d;
[τ] · (Lst,η)B = − 1
12d
(in “log(q)” units) ifm divides d. Suppose that d is even; then we have
[τ] · (L
ev
st,η)B = − 1
d
∑
ι
φ1(−d · ηι+ 1
2)
(in “log(q)” units).
Proof. For simplicity, we shall assume that d is odd. The even case is entirely similar.
The only diﬀerence is that, unlike in the odd case, the sum that one obtains in the even
case cannot be described in “closed form” (i.e., “= 0 if m does not divide d,= −
1
12d if m
divides d”).
By the above discussion on theta groups, it follows that for some line bundleN on T
such that N ⊗d ∼= OT ,w eh a v e :
T ∗
τ ((Lst,η)B)=( ( Lst,η)B) ⊗OT N
Since [τ] · [N] = 0, it thus suﬃces to consider the case T = B; τ = e (i.e., the origin of
E∞ ,B). Since ψηι(0) = 0, it follows that
[e] · [(Lst,η)B]=[ e] ·T ∗
η [(Lst)B]=[ −η] · [(Lst)B]
= d · [−η] · [e]+
∑
ι
[−ηι] · (dφ1 − φd)
= d ·
{
[−η] · [e]+
∑
ι
[−ηι] · φ1
}
− 1
d ·
∑
ι
[−d · ηι] · φ1)
(where in the ﬁnal equality, we use the fact that φd(θ)= 1
d · φ1(d · θ) (cf. Chapter IV,
Corollary 4.6)).
150

Next, let us observe that since the curvature at each ιof the metrized line bundle
OE∞ ,B (e + φ1) is (constant, hence) m-invariant, it follows (cf. Chapter IV, Proposition
5.1) that the m2-th power of OE∞ ,B (e + φ1)i s stabilized by translation by η and d · η (cf.
the discussion at the beginning of the proof involving the line bundle “N”). On the other
hand,
[OE∞ ,B (e + φ1)] · [e]=[ e]2 + φ1(0) = − 1
12 + φ1(0) = 0
Thus, we obtain that
0=[ OE∞ ,B (e + φ1)] · [−η]=[ OE∞ ,B (e + φ1)] · [−d · η]
This implies, in particular, that the expression in large brackets in the above equalities
concerning [e] · [(Lst,η)B] vanishes.
Thus, in summary, we have:
[e] · [(Lst,η)B]= − 1
d ·
∑
ι
[−d · ηι] · φ1
= − 1
d ·
∑
ι
φ1(−d · ηι)
= 1
d[e] · [−d · η]
But note that −d · η = e if and only if m divides d. Moreover, since −d · η is a torsion
point, it follows that [e] · [−d · η]i s0i f −d · η ̸= e,a n d− 1
12 if −d · η= e. This completes
the proof. ⃝
Finally, we note the following consequence of the above discussion: Suppose that
m =2 d.W r i t eL for (Lst,η)B (respectively, (L
ev
st,η)B)i f d is odd (respectively, even). Note
that the fact that m =2 d implies that L is symmetric. Thus, we can use the action of
the theta group GL to construct algebraic theta functions (cf. Chapter IV, §1; Chapter IV,
the discussion following Corollary 5.3), as follows. If α ∈ E∞ ,B(T)i sa n yT-valued point
for a B-scheme T as in Proposition 1.2, then we get an isomorphism (of metrized vector
bundles on T∞ )
L|T ∗
α KL
∼= (L|α0 ) ⊗OK0
L
OKL
(where K0
L
def
= KL/2 · KL,a n dL|α0 is the metrized line bundle on K0
L ×B T obtained by
descending L|T ∗
α KL
). Thus, for instance, if d is odd, then we obtain a trivialization of the
151

restriction of L to the subscheme T ∗
α KL.I n p a r t i c u l a r ,restriction to T ∗
α KL deﬁnes (by
composing with the above isomorphism) a morphism of metrized vector bundles on T∞
with GL-action:
(fB)∗L|T → (L|α0 ) ⊗OK0
L
OKL
For instance, if T = B,a n dα = e, then we get a morphism
(fB)∗L→ (L|e0 ) ⊗OK0
L
OKL
i.e., this morphism allows us to think of global sections ofL over E∞ ,B as being (essentially)
functions on the B-ﬁnite scheme KL.
§2. The Deﬁnition of the Evaluation Map
In this §, we set up the morphism which will be the principal topic of thecomparison
isomorphism to be proven in Chapter VI. Roughly speaking, this morphism is the morphism
given by evaluating global sections of an ample line bundle on the universal extension of a
(log) elliptic curve at the torsion points of the universal extension.
Let d ≥ 1 be an integer. Suppose that Slog is a ﬁne noetherian scheme, and let
Clog → Slog
be a log elliptic curve over Slog such that the “divisor at inﬁnity” D ⊆ S (i.e., the pull-
back of the divisor at inﬁnity of ( M1,0)Z via the classifying morphism S → (M1,0)Z)i sa
Cartier divisor (i.e., locally deﬁned by a non-zero divisor) on S. Also, let us assume that
´etale locally on the completion of S along D, the pull-back of the Tate parameterq to this
completion admits a d-th root.
Next, observe that by pulling back the corresponding objects in the universal case, we
obtain
E → S; E∞ ,S → S∞
(cf. Chapter IV, §4,5). By considering objects which are (´etale locally on S) obtained by
pulling back metrized line bundles on the tautological E∞ ,M over M
def
=( M1,0)Z (cf. the
theory of Chapter IV, §4,5), we obtain a notion of “metrized line bundles on E∞ ,S.” We
leave the routine details of the precise formulation of this notion to the reader. Let
152

L
be a metrized line bundle on E∞ ,S of relative degree d whose curvatures at all the com-
ponents of D are d-invariant (cf. Chapter IV, Proposition 5.1). In fact, ultimately we
will mainly be interested in the cases where S is a covering B (as in the discussion fol-
lowing Chapter IV, Corollary 5.7), or an object derived from such a B (i.e., a comple-
tion/localization of such a B;ap o i n to fs u c haB,e t c . ) ,a n dw h e r eL is one of the bundles
“ Lst,η”o r“ L
ev
st,η”o f §1 (or the pull-back of this bundle to an object derived from such a
B).
Next, we introduce some new notation. Recall theuniversal extension E† → E of the
log elliptic curve E (cf. Chapter III, Deﬁnition 1.2). Recall that the S-group scheme E†
is an extension of E by the aﬃne group scheme WE corresponding to the line bundle ωE.
Then for n ≥ 1 an integer, let us denote by
E†
[n]
def
= lim
−→
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
WE −→ E†
⏐⏐↓n·
WE
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
the WE-torsor E†
[n] → E obtained by applying a “push-out” to this extension via the
morphism n· : WE → WE given by multiplication by n.
Note that it follows from the deﬁnitions that the morphism d· : E† → E† (“multipli-
cation by d”)factors through E†
[d].T h u s ,w eg e tahomomorphism
E†
[d] → E†
of group schemes overS which induces an isomorphism (since d· induces multiplication by
d on WE) between WE ⊆ E†
[d] and WE ⊆ E† . Put another way, this morphism exhibits
the WE-torsor E†
[d] as the pull-back to E via the multiplication by d map on E of the
WE-torsor E† . Moreover, since E† extends naturally to a WE-torsor E†
C → C (Chapter
III, Corollary 4.3), and the morphism “multiplication by d”o n E extends naturally to
a morphism Cd → C (i.e., Cd is the semi-stable model of E over S with d irreducible
components in the special ﬁber – cf. the notation of Chapter IV, §4), we thus obtain (by
pulling back E†
C → C via Cd → C)a natural WE-torsor
E†
Cd,[d] → Cd
extending the WE-torsor E†
[d] → E over E ⊆ Cd. Note that the restriction
153

E†
Ed,[d] → Ed
of E†
Cd,[d] to Ed ⊆ Cd (i.e., the complement of the nodes of Cd – cf. the notation of
Chapter IV, §4) has a natural structure of group scheme over S with respect to which the
homomorphism E†
[d] → E† considered above extends to a homomorphism E†
Ed,[d] → E† .
On the other hand, since E∞ ,S is obtained by removing the nodes of an object C∞ ,S,
which, in turn, is obtained by blowing upCd, we thus see that theWE-torsor E†
Cd,[d] → Cd
restricts to an object E†
C∞ ,S,[d] → C∞ ,S, which, in turn, restricts to an object
E†
∞ ,[d]
def
= E†
E∞ ,S,[d] → E∞ ,S
(which extends (E†
Ed,[d] → Ed) ×S S∞ ).
Let us denote the kernel of the homomorphism Ed → E (i.e., the open version of the
morphism Cd → C considered above) by
dE ⊆ Ed
It follows from the assumption concerning the existence of roots of the Tate parameter
that dE forms a ﬁnite, ﬂat group scheme over S.
Lemma 2.1. There is a natural subgroup scheme
dE† ⊆ E†
Cd,[d]
which maps isomorphically to dE ⊆ Cd.
Proof. Indeed, observe that the homomorphism E†
Ed,[d] → E† ﬁts into the following
commutative diagram:
0 −→ WE −→ E†
Ed,[d] −→ Ed −→ 0
⏐⏐↓id
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
0 −→ WE −→ E† −→ E −→ 0
where the vertical arrow on the left is the identity. Thus, we conclude that E†
Ed,[d] → E†
is ﬁnite and ﬂat, and that its kernel maps isomorphically down to the kernel of Ed → E,
which is simply dE (cf. the discussion at the beginning of Chapter IV, §3). ⃝
154

We are now ready to deﬁne theevaluation map, which is the main topic of this§, and,
indeed, of this paper. By abuse of notation, let us write fS for all structure morphisms of
objects over S∞ down to S∞ .I f n ≥ 1 is an integer, let us denote by
(fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<n
the subsheaf of (fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
) consisting of those sections whose torsorial degree <n (cf.
Chapter III, Deﬁnition 2.2). Thus, ( fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<n forms a metrized vector bundle on
S∞ of rank d ·n (cf. the theory of Chapter IV, §5). Moreover, this metrized bundle admits
a natural action of the theta group GL associated to L.
On the other hand, for α ∈ E† (S) ⊆ E†
∞ ,[d](S∞ ), let us consider the push-forward to
S∞ of the restriction of the metrized line bundleL on E∞ ,S to the (result of base-changing
by S∞ → S the) subscheme (E†
Ed,[d] ⊇) T ∗
α (dE† ) ∼= T ∗
α (dE) ⊆ Ed:
(fS)∗(L|
T ∗
α (dE†
∞ )
)
(where dE†
∞
def
= dE† ×S S∞ ;“ T??” denotes “translation by ??”). One sees easily that
L|
T ∗α (dE†
∞ )
forms a metrized vector bundle on S∞ of rank d2. Moreover, since the action of
GL on L covers the action of KL = dE on T ∗
α (dE), we thus see that this metrized vector
bundle admits a natural action of the theta group GL.
Proposition 2.2. Under the above conditions, restriction of sections over E†
∞ ,[d] to the
subscheme T ∗
α (dE†
∞ ) ⊆ E†
∞ ,[d] deﬁnes a natural morphism
ΞL,d,α :( fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d → (fS)∗(L|
T ∗
α (dE†
∞ )
)
of metrized vector bundles of rank d2 on S∞ which is compatible with the actions of the
theta group GL on both sides. (When the various subscripts of Ξ are ﬁxed in a discussion,
they will often be omitted, especially in the case whereα is taken to be the origin.)
The main purpose of this paper is to investigate the extent to which this
restriction morphism ΞL,d,α is an isomorphism.
Next, suppose that
155

H ⊆G L
is a Lagrangian subgroup scheme(cf. Chapter IV, Deﬁnition 1.3 – note that the theory of
Lagrangian subgroups reviewed in Chapter IV, §1, extends immediately to the metrized
case). Let KH ⊆ KL
∼= dE ⊆ Ed be the image of H in KL.( T h u s ,H ∼= KH.) Let
E∞ H ,S
def
= E∞ ,S/(KH)S∞
(where (KH)S∞
def
= KH ×S S∞ ). Note that the immediate extension of Chapter IV,
Theorem 1.4, to the metrized case shows that there exists a metrized line bundle
LH
(of relative degree 1) on E∞ H ,S (deﬁned by H ⊆G L). Write
dEH
def
= dE/KH
(so dEH ×S S∞ ⊆ E∞ H ,S). Thus, dEH is a ﬁnite ﬂat group scheme over S. Next, observe
that since KH ⊆ dE is annihilated by d, it follows that the ﬁnite morphism Cd → C
considered above (which compactiﬁes multiplication byd) factors (uniquely) as a composite
Cd → CH → C
of ﬁnite morphisms, where CH is S-ﬂat, and, after base-change via S∞ → S and restriction
to US
def
= S − D, the morphism Cd → CH may be identiﬁed with the morphism E∞ ,S →
E∞ H ,S. Thus, since E†
∞ ,[d] → E∞ ,S is obtained from E†
Cd,[d] → Cd which, in turn, is
obtained by pulling back E†
C → C via Cd → C, it follows that we obtain natural WE-
torsors
E†
CH ,[d] → CH; E†
∞ H ,[d] → E∞ H ,S
whose pull-backs to Cd, E∞ ,S may be identiﬁed with E†
Cd,[d] → Cd, E†
∞ ,[d] → E∞ ,S. Note,
moreover, that (it is immediate from the deﬁnitions that) the lifting dE† of dE deﬁnes a
lifting
dE†
∞ H ⊆ E†
∞ H ,[d]
of dEH ×S S∞ ⊆ E∞ H ,S. Finally, let us write αH for the image of α in E†
∞ H ,[d](S∞ ).
156

Thus, by taking the H-invariants of the domain and range of Ξ L,d,α in Proposition
2.2 (and applying the immediate extension of Chapter IV, Theorem 1.4, to the metrized
case), we obtain the following:
Proposition 2.3. Under the above conditions, restriction of sections overE†
∞ H ,[d] to the
subscheme T ∗
α (dE†
∞ H ) ⊆ E†
∞ H ,[d] deﬁnes a natural morphism
ΞH
L,d,α :( fS)∗(LH |
E†
∞ H ,[d]
)<d → (fS)∗(LH |
T ∗
α H (dE†
∞ H )
)
of metrized vector bundles of rank d on S∞ which may be identiﬁed with the morphism
obtained from the restriction map ΞL,d,α of Proposition 2.2 by taking H-invariants.
Since, in this case, taking H-invariants is a faithful operation (cf. Chapter IV, Theorem
1.4), it follows that, for instance, the bijectivity of ΞL,d,α is equivalent to that of ΞH
L,d,α.
Often, it will be technically easier to analyze the restriction morphism Ξ after taking
H-invariants.
Finally, to prepare for §5 ,6b e l o w ,w ec o n s i d e rt h edependence of Ξ on α.L e t w be
a section of WE. Then note that translation by w induces natural identiﬁcations
T ∗
w (L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)= L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
; T ∗
w (LH |
E†
∞ H ,[d]
)= LH |
E†
∞ H ,[d]
Thus, translation by w eﬀects automorphisms T ∗
w of the metrized vector bundles
(fS)∗(L
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d;( fS)∗(LH |
E†
∞ H ,[d]
)<d
which are unipotent with respect to the ﬁltration (on ( fS)∗(−)<d)b y torsorial degree.I n
other words, these automorphisms T ∗
w induce the identity on each of the subquotients
(fS)∗(−)<i/(fS)∗(−)<i−1 (for i ∈ Z). Indeed, this follows immediately from the deﬁnition
of a WE-torsor. Thus, since both the domain and range of the morphisms of Proposition
2.2 (respectively, 2.3) are the same (i.e., not just isomorphic) for α and α + w,i tm a k e s
sense to compare these two morphisms, and, in particular, to compare theirdeterminants.
Note, moreover, that the morphisms of Propositions 2.2 (respectively, 2.3) for α, α + w
diﬀer precisely by composition with the automorphismT ∗
w . Thus, we obtain the following:
Lemma 2.4. For any section w of WE, we have:
det(ΞL,d,α) = det(ΞL,d,α+w); det(Ξ H
L,d,α) = det(ΞH
L,d,α+w)
157

(where “det(−)” is a section of the metrized line bundle det(range) ⊗ det(domain)−1 on
S∞ ).
§3. Extension of the ´Etale-Integral Structure
In this §, we show that the ´etale-integral structures “ Ret” discussed in Chapter III,
§6, are deﬁned for arbitrary elliptic curves (i.e., not just for degenerating elliptic curves, as
in the discussion of Chapter III, §6), and, moreover, are that the functions in these ´etale-
integral structuresassume integral valuesat the torsion points appearing in the deﬁnition of
the evaluation map. It will be relative to this ´etale-integral structure (deﬁned for arbitrary
elliptic curves) that we will prove the comparison isomorphism in Chapter VI.
We work with the notation of Chapter III,§5, 6. Thus, let O be a Zariski localization
of OK,w h e r eK is a ﬁnite extension of Q.L e t
A
def
= O[[q]]; S
def
=S p e c (A)
Then we have a one-dimensional semi-abelian scheme
E → S
over S. Roughly speaking, one may think of E as being “ Gm/qZ.” More rigorously, E
may be compactiﬁed to a log elliptic curve Clog → Slog.M o r e o v e r ,CˆS (the result of base
changing C to the q-adic completion ˆS of S) may be written as
CˆS = C∞
ˆS /Zet
Recall that in Chapter III, §6, we used the natural isomorphism of Chapter III, The-
orem 5.6, Corollary 5.9:
E†
C |C∞
ˆS
∼= (WE)ˆS ×ˆS C∞
ˆS
to deﬁne a new integral structure
Ret
E†
C
on R
E†
C
⊗ Q (cf. Chapter III, Proposition 6.1). If one trivializes ωE by means of the
section d log(U), then we may write
158

WE =S p e c (OS[T])
(where T is the indeterminate corresponding to the chosen trivialization of ωE). The new
integral structure was obtained by essentially adjoining the polynomials
T[n] def
= 1
n!T(T − 1)(T − 2) · ... · (T − (n − 1))
(for n ∈ Z≥0) to the original integral structure.
Now let us write (for d ≥ 1 an integer)
( ˜Cd)ˆS
def
= C∞
ˆS /(d · Zet)
Since ( ˜Cd)ˆS → ˆS is proper, it algebrizes to some ˜Cd → S.L e t ˜E → S be the open
subscheme of ˜Cd obtained by removing from ˜Cd the irreducible components of the special
ﬁber (i.e., the ﬁber over q = 0) that do not contain the image of the identity element
eC∞
ˆS
∈ C∞
ˆS
( ˆS)o f C∞
ˆS
.L e t ˜Ed → S denote the complement of the nodes of the special
ﬁber of ˜Cd.T h u s ,˜Ed and ˜E have a natural structure of group scheme over S,a n d ˜E is a
semi-abelian scheme over S. Moreover, let us observe that we have a natural ﬁnite ´etale
covering
˜Ed → E
of degree d which compactiﬁes to a ﬁnite morphism ˜Cd → C. Relative to the notation
of §2, if one takes “ E”i n loc. cit. to be ˜E (in the notation of the present discussion),
then the resulting “Ed” (respectively, “Cd”) in the notation ofloc. cit. corresponds to ˜Ed
(respectively, ˜Cd) in the present discussion. Moreover, I claim that:
The resulting “ E†
[d],” “E†
Cd,[d]”o f loc. cit. correspond to E†
C |˜Cd
, E†
C |˜Ed
in the notation of the present discussion.
Indeed, to prove this, one reasons as follows: The multiplication by d morphism ˜Ed → ˜E
factors as the composite of the ﬁnite ´etale isogeny ˜Ed → E under consideration with some
other ﬁnite isogeny E → ˜E (of degree d, whose kernel may be naturally identiﬁed with
μd). Moreover, the push-forward morphism associated to the isogeny E → ˜E induces a
natural isomorphism between the universal extensions ofE and ˜E (cf. the discussion at the
beginning of Chapter IV, §3). Thus, it follows that the pull-back of the universal extension
of ˜E to ˜Ed via the multiplication by d map may be identiﬁed with the pull-back of the
universal extension of E to ˜Ed via the ﬁnite ´etale isogeny E → ˜E under consideration.
159

On the other hand, the former pull-back is, by the deﬁnition of “ E†
[d]” given in §2, none
other than the “ E†
[d]” associated to ˜Ed. (One concludes the corresponding statement for
“ E†
Cd,[d]” by using the fact that the complement of ˜Ed in (the normal scheme) ˜Cd is of
codimension 2.) This completes the proof of the claim. Thus, in the following, we will
write
E†
˜Cd,[d]
for the W˜E-torsor over ˜Cd which is the “E†
Cd,[d]” (in the notation of§2) for the case where
one takes “E”( i n§2) to be ˜E (in the notation of the present discussion).
In particular, we see that by pulling back the new integral structure of Chapter III,
Proposition 6.1, on Ret
E†
C
via ˜Cd → C, we obtain a new integral structure
Ret
E†
˜Cd,[d]
⊆R
E†
˜Cd,[d]
⊗ Q
Moreover, this integral structure has the property that:
If f is any section of Ret
E†
˜Cd,[d]
(over, say, ˜Ed), then the restriction of f
to any d-torsion point τ ∈ ˜Ed(S) deﬁnes an integral section of OS.
Indeed, pulling everything back to C∞
ˆS
, we see this amounts to the observation that the
pull-backs to C∞
ˆS
of the d-torsion points of ˜Ed have coordinates, relative to the decompo-
sition E†
C |C∞
ˆS
∼= (WE)ˆS ×ˆS C∞
ˆS
,g i v e nb y
(β,α · qβ)
where β ∈ Z,a n dα is a d-th root of unity. (Indeed, this follows from Chapter III, Corollary
5.9, and the fact that the “ q-parameter” of ˜E is given by qd.) Thus, the above property
follows from the fact that any T[n] has integral values at β ∈ Z.( I n f a c t , f o rβ ∈ Z≥0,
the value of T[n] at T = β is 0 (if β<n ), 1 (if β = n),
(β
n
)
(i.e., binomial coeﬃcients, if
β>n ).)
Next, let us observe that the semi-abelian scheme ˜E → S is universal among degener-
ating one-dimensional semi-abelian schemes whose q-parameters admit a d-th root. Thus,
what we have done above already deﬁnes a new integral structure on “ R
E†
Cd,[d]
” for any
degenerating one-dimensional semi-abelian scheme E → S (for which the base S is Z-ﬂat)
160

whose q-parameter admits a d-th root. In fact, we would like to extend this new integral
structure on R
E†
Cd,[d]
from a formal neighborhood of the divisor at inﬁnity (where the new
integral structure has already been deﬁned) to the whole of ( M1,0)Z.T h a t i s t o s a y , i n
the following discussion, we propose to do the following:
We would like to “ p-adically analytically continue” the new integral
structure on “ R
E†
Cd,[d]
⊗ Q” from a formal neighborhood of the divisor
at inﬁnity to the whole of (M1,0)Z.
More precisely, given any one-dimensional semi-abelian schemeET → T,w h e r eT is Z-ﬂat,
and the q-parameters of ET → T are non-zero divisors that admit d-th roots, we would
like to deﬁne a new integral structure on the associated R
E†
(CT )d,[d]
⊗ Q. Clearly, since
for a ﬁxed n, the new integral structure on Fn(R
E†
(CT )d,[d]
⊗ Q) diﬀers from the integral
structure deﬁned by Fn(R
E†
(CT )d,[d]
) at only ﬁnitely many primes, it suﬃces to deﬁne these
new integral structure locally, p-adically, at each rational prime p. Thus, we may assume
that T is a Zp-scheme.
Next, let us observe that in the discussion of Chapter III, §6, of the new integral
structure in the case of a degenerating ET → T (i.e., Chapter III, Proposition 6.1), the
key object that we needed in order to deﬁne the new integral structure was the canoni-
cal decomposition E†
C |C∞
ˆS
∼= (WE)ˆS ×ˆS C∞
ˆS
, i.e., the canonical section κ (cf. Chapter III,
Theorem 2.1). It is precisely because this canonical section is only deﬁned in a formal neigh-
borhood of the divisor at inﬁnity that the discussion of Chapter III, §6 (i.e., Chapter III,
Proposition 6.1) could only be carried out over such a formal neighborhood. In fact, how-
ever, careful inspection reveals that really,for a ﬁxed n, in order to deﬁne F
n(Ret
E†
(CT )d,[d]
)
at a ﬁxed prime p, it suﬃces to have κ only modulo pN , for some suﬃciently large N.
Moreover, in the notation of the above discussion in the degenerating case, if we let
˜G ⊆ C∞
ˆS /(pN · d · Zet)
be the group scheme overS obtained by removing the nodes fromC∞
ˆS
/(pN ·d·Zet), then we
get a ﬁnite ´etale covering ˜G → ˜E (of degree pN ) with the property thatκ is already deﬁned
modulo pN after pull-back via ˜G → ˜E (or over the compactiﬁcationC∞
ˆS
/(pN ·d·Zet) → ˜Cd).
Indeed, this follows from the fact that 1et ∈ Zet acts on κ by κ ↦→ κ+ 1 (cf. Chapter III,
Theorem 5.6), so elements of pN ·d ·Zet preserve κ modulo pN . Note, moreover, that since
the isogeny ˜G → ˜E is of degree pN , there exists an isogeny of group schemes˜H → ˜G which
is ﬁnite of degree pN such that the composite
161

˜H → ˜E
is isomorphic to the “multiplication by pN ” map on ˜E over US =S p e c (A[q−1]) (⊆ S).
Thus, in summary,
The canonical section κ is deﬁned modulo pN after pull-back from ˜E to
˜H.
With these preparatory remarks behind us, we are now ready to begin the “analytic con-
tinuation” argument:
Analytic Continuation Argument:
Let ET → T be a family of elliptic curves, whereT is a ﬁnite, ﬂat (hence, in particular,
aﬃne) scheme over (M1,0)Zp (i.e., the complement of the divisor at inﬁnity of (M1,0)Zp ).
To simplify the discussion, we shall also assume that T is normal.W r i t e
HT → ET
for the isogeny given by multiplication by pN .( T h u s ,HT is abstractly isomorphic as a
T-scheme to ET .)
Consider the torsorE†
T,[d] → ET (i.e., the “E†
[d]” associated toET ). This torsor deﬁnes
ac l a s s
η ∈ H1(ET ,ωET |ET ) ∼= OT
(where the “ ∼=” follows from relative Serre duality for the morphismET → T). If we pull
this class back to HT , then we obtain a class
η˜H ∈E
def
= H1(HT ,ωET |HT )
where E is a line bundle on T.
I claim that η˜H is ≡ 0 modulo pN . There are many ways to verify this claim. One
way is the following: Since E is a line bundle on T,a n dT is normal, it suﬃces to verify
that η˜H vanishes modulo pN after restricting η˜H to the p-adic completion ˆOT,p of the
localization of T at any generic point pT of T ⊗ Fp. On the other hand, the discrete
valuation ring ˆOT,pT
is clearly dominated by a discrete valuation ring which arises as the
p-adic completion ˆOW,pW
of some W at a generic point pW of W ⊗ Fp,w h e r eW is the
base of some degenerating elliptic curve whose classifying morphism to (M1,0)Z deﬁnes a
162

ﬁnite morphism W → Spec(Zp[[q]]). On the other hand, for bases such as ˆOW,pW
, the fact
that η˜H vanishes modulo pN follows from the above discussion of the degenerating case
(i.e., where we saw that the canonical section κ is deﬁned modulo pN after pull-back via
“ ˜H → ˜E”). This concludes the proof of the claim.
Thus, the ωE-torsor E†
T,[d] → ET splits modulo pN after pull-back via HT → ET .W e
would like to show that this torsor not only splits modulopN , but thatit admits a splitting
which extends the canonical splitting κ (modulo pN) in the degenerating case.T od ot h i s ,
we must characterize the canonical splitting κ in terms that make sense even for non-
degenerating elliptic curves. We do this as follows: Note that since E†
T,[d] has a structure
of abelian group schemeover T, it admits an action by Σ
def
= {±1}. Of course, HT and ET
are also commutative group schemes over T, hence admit natural actions by Σ = {±1}.
Then let us observe that since the canonical splitting κ is a group homomorphism (cf.
Chapter III, Theorem 2.1), it commutes with the respective actions of Σ = {±1}.L e tu s
regard the line bundle ωET on T as an OT -module with Σ action, where Σ acts via the
tautological character Σ →{ ± 1}⊆O ×
T . Then it follows by general nonsense that the
obstruction to deﬁning a Σ -equivariant splitting of E†
T,[d] over HT modulo pN is a class
ηΣ ∈ H1(Σ,ωET ⊗ (Z/pN )) = {ωET ⊗ (Z/pN )}⊗ (Z/2)
Moreover, if this class vanishes, then such a splitting will be unique modulo
H0(Σ,ωET ⊗ (Z/pN )) = ker(2 :ωET ⊗ (Z/pN ))
(i.e., modulo the kernel of multiplication by 2 on ωET ⊗ (Z/pN )).
Thus, we would like to see that ηΣ vanishes. Of course, this is only a problem when
p = 2. In this case, sinceωET is a line bundle onT, one proves thatηΣ vanishes in precisely
the same way as we proved above that η˜H vanishes modulo pN – i.e., by reducing to the
degenerating case, where we know the result to be true. This completes the proof that
η
Σ is always zero. As for uniqueness, in general, we only get uniqueness modulo pN −1 (of
course, if p is odd, we get uniqueness modulopN ). However, by taking N suﬃciently large
(e.g., one larger than the original N necessary to deﬁne the integral structure), this is not
a problem. This uniqueness thus shows, by the same argument as that used above to prove
that η˜H ≡ 0 modulo pN – i.e., by comparing with the degenerating case–t h a t :
There exists a splitting of the torsor E†
T,[d] over HT modulo pN which
extends the canonical splitting κ considered in the degenerating case
modulo pN −1.
Thus, by taking N suﬃciently large, we see that all the functions “ T[i]”( f o ri< our ﬁxed
n) may be deﬁned modulo a suﬃciently large power ofp so that we may form a new integral
structure
163

Fn(Ret
E†
T,[d]
) ⊆R
E†
T,[d]
⊗ Q
which extends the integral structure of Chapter III, Proposition 6.1 in the degenerating
case – at least after pulling back from ET to HT . But then, by using the “ ˆOT,pT
’s,”
reduction to the degenerating case, and ﬁnite ﬂat descent (of coherent sheaves) for the
morphism HT → ET , it is easy to see that these integral structures descend back down to
ET , as desired. This completes the “p-adic analytic continuation argument.”
In other words, we have proven the following:
Theorem 3.1. Let d ≥ 1 be an integer. Let
Clog → Slog
be any log elliptic curve as at the beginning of §2 – i.e., the associated q-parameter ∈O ˆS
(where ˆS is the completion ofS along the divisor at inﬁnity D ⊆ S deﬁned by Clog → Slog)
is a non-zero divisor which, ´etale locally, admits a d-th root. Suppose further that S is Z-
ﬂat. Then the resulting R
E†
Cd,[d]
(cf. §2, for the deﬁnition of E†
Cd,[d]) and its ﬁltration
admit natural integral structures
... ⊆ Fn(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
) ⊆ ... ⊆R et
E†
Cd,[d]
⊆R
E†
Cd,[d]
⊗ Q
where Fn(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
) is a rank n vector bundle on Cd such that
(Fn+1/Fn)(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
)= 1
n! ·O Cd ⊗OS τ⊗n
E
These integral structures are uniquely characterized by the properties that they are functo-
rial in Clog → Slog, and they extend the integral structures deﬁned in the degenerating case
in Chapter III, Proposition 6.1. Finally, the functions of Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
assume integral values
at the d-torsion points of E†
Cd,[d](S).
Proof. It remains only to remark that the ﬁnal assertion concerning the integrality of
the values at d-torsion points may be veriﬁed for normal T as in the analytic continuation
argument above by checking integrality at the various ˆOT,pT
(where pT is a generic point
164

of T ⊗ Fp). Moreover the integrality at ˆOT,pT
may be veriﬁed by reduction to the degen-
erating case, where it has already been veriﬁed (cf. the discussion following Chapter III,
Proposition 6.1). ⃝
Deﬁnition 3.2. (Just as in Chapter III, Deﬁnition 6.2) the integral structures denoted
by a superscript “et” will be referred to as ´etale-integral, or et-integral, structures.T h a t
is to say, “et” stands for “´etale,” and is the same as the “et” in Z
et. In particular, the
“´etale-integral structure” may be thought of as the integral structure arising from thinking
of algebraic functions on the universal extension as set-theoretic functions on Zet, i.e., on
the ﬁbers of the inﬁnite ´etale covering C∞
ˆS
→ C∞
ˆS
/Zet = CˆS.
The original integral structure on the various “R’s” (i.e., the integral structures with-
out a label) will be referred to as thede Rham-integral, or DR-integral, structures.T h i si s
because they arise from the original natural integral structures on the universal extension
E† as a sort of de Rham cohomology – i.e., “ H1
DR(E, O×
E )” – associated to E.
Remark. In fact, even though in Theorem 3.1, we assumed thatS was Z-ﬂat, by working in
the universal case and then pulling back, one sees that the various sheaves we constructed
with a superscript “et” are deﬁned for any C
log → Slog as in Theorem 3.1 even without
the assumption of Z-ﬂatness .
§4. Linear Relations Among Higher Schottky-Weierstrass Zeta Functions
In this §, we consider the extent to which thetwisted Schottky-Weierstrass zeta func-
tions of Chapter IV, §3, satisfy linear relations modulo various powers of q over the base
ring A (notation as in Chapter IV, §3). Thus, throughout this §, we will use the notation
and conventions of Chapter IV,§2,3. The calculations of linear relations that we carry out
in this § will turn out to yield the key technical machinery behind the main result of this
paper.
We begin by ﬁxing our base ring O as in Chapter IV, §2,3). Thus, O is a Zariski
localization of the ring of integers of a ﬁnite extension of Q such that Pic(O)= {1}.W e
also ﬁx a positive even integer n =2 m.T h e n o v e rS =S p e c (A)( w h e r eA = O[[q]]), we
constructed in Chapter IV, §2, an isogeny
E → ˜E
whose kernel is equal to μn.O v e r˜E, we considered various line bundles such as:
˜L˜E
def
= O ˜E(˜e); ˜M˜E
165

Here, ˜M˜E was deﬁned as the restriction to ˜E ⊆ ˜C of a line bundle ˜M on ˜C obtained by
descending the line bundle ˜L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
on C∞
ˆS
via the “standard action” of Zet × μn on ˜L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
.
Recall that the line bundle ˜L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
is the line bundle whose global sections over C∞
ˆS
can be
written as topological A-linear combinations of certain special monomials
qm·k2+ik · U2mk+i · θm
(where k,i ∈ Z, |i|≤ m) discussed in Chapter IV, Proposition 2.2. Moreover, for any
character χ ∈ Hom(Πn,(μn)S)( w h e r eΠn =( Zet/n) × μn), we deﬁned a line bundle
˜Mχ
˜E
and we saw in Chapter IV, Theorem 2.1 that for a certain particular character, which we
denote by χθ ∈ Hom(Πn,(μn)S), we have an isomorphism
˜L˜E
∼= Mχθ
˜E
of degree 1 line bundles on ˜E.
In the following discussion, we would like to ﬁx a character
χL ∈ Hom(Πn,(μn)S)
Let us write χM
def
= χL · χθ and denote the restrictions of χM and χL to μn ⊆ (Zet/n) ×
μn =Π n by χM,μ : μn → μn and χL,μ : μn → μn, respectively. Thus, we have
˜LχL
˜E
∼= ˜MχM
˜E
Recall that there is a standard action of μn on the special monomials
qm·k2+ik · U2mk+i · θm
(i.e., the action used to deﬁne ˜M). Note that for this action, μn acts trivially on θm.L e t
us refer to the special monomials on whichμn acts via (χM,μ)−1 as χL-special monomials.
For j a positive integer, let us write
cj(χL) ∈ Q
166

for the maximal nonzero rational number c such that modulo qn·c, the number of nonzero
χL-special monomials is <j . Let us denote this set of <j nonzero (modulo qn·cj(χL))
χL-special monomials by
Cj(χL)
We remark that, here (and in the following discussion):
By “modulo” we mean, strictly speaking, when restricted to sections of
L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
|EˆS
over EˆS =( Gm)ˆS.
When (as in the following discussion), the character χL is ﬁxed, we shall often just write
cj, Cj for cj(χL)a n dCj(χL), respectively.
Schola 4.1. Computation of Special Monomials Modulo Powers of q
Let us compute Cj and cj. There are three cases to consider:
Case I: χL,μ = 1. In this case, the χL-special monomials are those for which i = ±m.
Thus, the monomials for which the exponent m · k2 + ik of q is 0 are precisely:
M
def
= Um · θm,M ′ def
= U −m · θm =( −1)et(M)
The other χL-special monomials
ket(M)= qm·k2+mk · U2mk+m · θm, (−k)et(M ′)= qm·k2+mk · U −2mk−m · θm
are given by applying ( ±k)et (for k ≥ 0) to these original two. In particular, there are
precisely 2 + 2k monomials obtained by applying k′
et (for |k′|≤ k) to the original two
monomials. Thus, for k ≥ 0, we have
c2k+1 = c2k+2 = 1
n(m · k2 + mk)= 1
2(k2 + k)
while the set C2k+1 = C2k+2 is given by
{k′
et(M)}0≤k′<k
⋃
{k′
et(M ′)}−k<k′≤0
Case II: χL,μ = χθ|μn . In this case, the χL-special monomials are those for which i =0 .
Thus, the only monomial for which the exponent m · k2 + ik of q is 0 is the monomial:
167

M
def
= θm
The other χL-special monomials
ket(M)= qm·k2
· U2mk · θm, (−k)et(M)= qm·k2
· U −2mk · θm
are given by applying (±k)et (for k ≥ 0) to this original monomial. In particular, there are
precisely 1+2k monomials obtained by applyingk′
et (for |k′|≤ k) to the original monomial.
Thus, we have
c1 =0
and, for k ≥ 1,
c2k = c2k+1 = 1
n · m · k2 = 1
2k2
while C1 = ∅; the set C2k = C2k+1 is given by
{k′
et(M)}0≤|k′ |<k
Case III: χL,μ2 ̸= 1. In this case, the χL-special monomials are those for which i = iχ,
for some ﬁxed integer iχ such that 0 < |iχ | <m . Thus, the only monomial for which the
exponent m · k2 + ik of q is 0 is the monomial:
M
def
= Uiχ · θm
The other χL-special monomials
ket(M)= qm·k2+iχ ·k · U2mk+iχ · θm, (−k)et(M)= qm·k2 −iχ ·k · U −2mk+iχ · θm
are given by applying (±k)et (for k ≥ 0) to this original monomial. Note that (for k ≥ 1)
m · k2 + |iχ |· k>m · k2 −| iχ |· k>m · (k − 1)2 + |iχ |· (k − 1)
(Indeed, the second inequality follows from the fact that 2 mk = m + m · (2k − 1) >
m + |iχ |· (2k − 1).) In other words, the exponent of q induces a total ordering on the set
of χL-special monomials. The ﬁrst 2 k monomials are given by applying k′
et (for integers
168

k′ such that either |k′| <k or |k′| = k, k′ · iχ < 0) to the original monomial, while the
ﬁrst 1 + 2k monomials are given by applying k′
et (for integers k′ such that |k′|≤ k)t ot h e
original monomial. Thus, we have
c1 =0
and, for k ≥ 1,
c2k = 1
n · (m · k2 −| iχ |· k); c2k+1 = 1
n · (m · k2 + |iχ |· k)
Moreover, C1 = ∅; the set C2k is given by
{k′
et(M)}0≤|k′ |<k
while the set C2k+1 is given by
{k′
et(M)}0≤|k′ |<k
⋃
{k′
et(M)}|k′ |=k, k ′ ·iχ <0
This completes the computation of Cj and cj.
Lemma 4.2. For any choice of character χL ∈ Hom(Πn,(μn)S), we have:
j∑
a=1
ca = 1
24j(j2 − 1)
for any odd integer j ≥ 1.
Proof. First, we observe that for any even integer a =2 k ≥ 2, we have ca + ca+1 = k2.
Indeed, in the cases where χL,μ ̸= 1 (i.e., Cases II and III), it is immediate from the
formulas for ca and ca+1 that we have ca + ca+1 = k2. On the other hand, in Case I,
we have ca + ca+1 = 1
2 {k2 + k +( k − 1)2 +( k − 1)} = k2, as asserted. Thus, if we let
j′ def
= 1
2 (j − 1), then we have
j∑
a=1
ca =
j′
∑
b=1
b2 = 1
6j′(j′ + 1)(2j′ +1 )= 1
24(j − 1)(j +1 )j = 1
24j(j2 − 1)
as desired. ⃝
169

Note that in the above analysis, Cj was always obtained by applying various ket’s to
certain ﬁxed monomials M, M ′ which were the unique χL-special monomials that were
nonzero modulo q. Let us write (for j ≥ 3 in Case I; for j ≥ 2 in Cases II, III)
Max(Cj) (respectively , Min(Cj))
for the maximum (respectively, minimum) integerk such that thesymbol ket(M)o rket(M ′)
appears in the lists of elements of Cj that were given in Schola 4.1. (Here, by “symbol,”
we simply mean that in Case I, we wish to distinguish the symbol M ′ from (−1)et(M).)
Note that
Max(Cj) ≥ 0 ≥ Min(Cj)
Also, let us write
Span(Cj)
def
= Max(Cj) − Min(Cj)
Thus, in Case I,w eh a v e( f o rk ≥ 1)
Max(C2k+1 = C2k+2)= k − 1; Min( C2k+1 = C2k+2)= −(k − 1)
Span(C2k+1 = C2k+2)=2 k − 2
In Case II,w eh a v e( f o rk ≥ 1)
Max(C2k = C2k+1)= k − 1; Min( C2k = C2k+1)= −(k − 1)
Span(C2k = C2k+1)=2 k − 2
In Case III,w eh a v e( f o rk ≥ 1)
Max(C2k)= k − 1; Min( C2k)= −(k − 1); Span( C2k)=2 k − 2
and
Max(C2k+1)= k − 1+ ϵMax;M i n ( C2k+1)= −(k − 1) − ϵMin
Span(C2k+1)=2 k − 1
170

where ϵMax + ϵMin =1 ,a n dϵMax is 1 (respectively, 0) if iχ < 0 (respectively, iχ > 0). In
particular, we observe that if Min(Cj) ≤ a ≤ Max(Cj), then aet(M) ∈ Cj (in all Cases);
aet(M ′) ∈ Cj (in Case I).
Now let a be an integer such that Min(Cj) ≤ a ≤ Max(Cj), for some integer j such
that Max(Cj), Min(Cj) are deﬁned. Let ket(M) be an arbitrary χL-special monomial (so
k may be any integer). Then observe that:
If (−a)et(ket(M)) = (−a+ k)et(M) is nonzero modulo q, then it follows
that ket(M) ∈ Cj.
Indeed, if (−a)et(ket(M)) is nonzero modulo q, then (by the discussion in Schola 4.1) we
deduce that ( −a)et(ket(M)) is M or M ′ (in Case I); ( −a)et(ket(M)) = M (in Cases II,
III). Thus, ket(M)i s aet(M)o r aet(M ′)( i nC a s eI ) ;ket(M)= aet(M) (in Cases II, III).
In particular, ket(M) ∈ Cj, as desired. This observation implies the following:
Lemma 4.3. Let j be an integer which is ≥ 3 (in Case I); ≥ 2 (in Cases II, III). If
ψ is any topological A-linear combination of χL-special monomials which is ≡ 0 modulo
qn·cj ,t h e n(−a)et(ψ) is ≡ 0 modulo q, for any a such that Min(Cj) ≤ a ≤ Max(Cj).
Proof. Indeed, such a ψ is a topological A-linear combination of ket(M)’s, where k
ranges over all elements of Z.I f ket(M) ̸∈ Cj, then it follows from the above observation
that ( −a)et(ket(M)) ≡ 0 modulo q. Thus, the only terms in the topological A-linear
combination of ket(M)’s that might yield a nonzero contribution to ( −a)et(ψ) modulo q
are those for which ket(M) ∈ Cj. But since ψ ≡ 0 modulo qn·cj , it follows (from the
deﬁnition of the set Cj!) that the coeﬃcients of those terms must be ≡ 0 modulo q.T h u s ,
(−a)et(ψ) ≡ 0 modulo q, as desired. (Note that in this argument, we make essential use of
the fact that the elements of the set {ket(M)}k∈Z are (topologically) linearly independent
over A – a fact which follows immediately from the observation that the exponents of U
which appear in distinct elements of this set are distinct.) ⃝
Now recall the operator δχ (i.e., given by δχ(?)
def
= {χ(1et) · 1et(?)}− ?, where here we
take χ
def
= χM) of Chapter IV, §3. Note that if, for instance, ψ is a topological A-linear
combination of χL-special monomials which is zero modulo qn·cj , then one can compute
δχ(ψ) modulo q as soon as one knowsψ and 1et(ψ) modulo q. By induction, one sees easily
that one can compute the b-th iterate of this operator (δχ)b(ψ) (for some positive integer
b) modulo q as soon as one knows ψ, 1et(ψ),... ,bet(ψ) modulo q. Thus, Lemma 4.3 has
the following consequence/generalization:
Corollary 4.4. Let j be an integer which is ≥ 3 (in Case I); ≥ 2 (in Cases II, III). If
ψ is any topological A-linear combination of χL-special monomials which is ≡ 0 modulo
qn·cj ,t h e n
171

(−a)et((δχ)b(ψ)) ≡ 0 (modulo q)
for any integers a, b such that 0 ≤ b ≤ Span(Cj), b +M i n (Cj) ≤ a ≤ Max(Cj).
Next, let us recall the twisted Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functions ζχ
i (of Chapter IV,
Theorem 3.1) associated to the character χ
def
= χM. In the following discussion, we shall
think of these functions as sections of L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
(i.e., without the superscripted χ – contrary to
the notation of Chapter IV, Theorem 3.1) on which Zet × μn acts via χ−1. Note that (by
Chapter IV, Theorem 3.1) the ζχ
i are all topological A-linear combinations of χL-special
monomials, i.e., satisfy the assumptions on ψ in Corollary 4.4. Now let us suppose that
for some integer r ≥ 0, we are given an A-linear combination
r∑
i=0
γi · ζχ
i
(where the γi ∈ A)w h i c hi s≡ 0 modulo qn·cj ,f o rj as in Corollary 4.4. Let ϵCase be 1 if
we are in Case I, and 0 otherwise. Suppose, moreover, that for somes ≤ Span(Cj)+ ϵCase,
we have:
γs ̸≡ 0; γi ≡ 0 modulo q
for all i>s . Then, by applying Corollary 4.4 to the above sum, we obtain that for some
integer a:
0 ≡ aet
{ r∑
i=0
γi · (δχ)s−ϵCase (ζχ
i )
}
≡ aet
{ s∑
i=s−ϵCase
γi · (δχ)s−ϵCase (ζχ
i )
}
modulo q
i.e., the terms such that i>s vanish modulo q because of the assumptions on the γi;
the terms such that i<s − ϵCase vanish because (δχ)s−ϵCase (ζχ
i ) = 0 (by the formula for
δχ(ζχ
i ) given in Chapter IV, Theorem 3.1) for such i. If we are in Cases II or III, then
since (δχ)s(ζχ
s )= ±ζχ
0 ,a n dδχ(ζχ
0 )= χM(1) · 1et(ζχ
0 ) − ζχ
0 = 0, we obtain that
0 ≡ γs · aet(ζχ
0 )= γs · χM(a)−1 · ζχ
0 modulo q
i.e., γs ≡ 0 modulo q,w h i c hi sacontradiction.I n C a s e I , w e h a v e (δχ)s−1(ζχ
s )= ±ζχ
1 +γ·ζχ
0
(for some γ ∈ A), (δχ)s(ζχ
s )= ±ζχ
0 , so we obtain that
0 ≡ γs−1 · aet(±ζχ
1 + γ · ζχ
0 ) ± γs · aet(ζχ
0 ) modulo q
172

(where the various “ ±’s” which appear are not necessarily “coordinated”). Moreover,
aet(ζχ
1 ) is clearly equal to a root of unity times ζχ
1 plus an A-multiple of ζχ
0 , while aet(ζχ
0 )
is equal to a root of unity times ζχ
0 . On the other hand, by Lemma 4.5 below, we know
that in Case I,ζχ
0 and ζχ
1 are O-linearly independent modulo q. Thus, we obtain that γs−1
and γs are ≡ 0 modulo q, which is again a contradiction.
Lemma 4.5. In Case I, the reductions moduloq of ζχ
0 and ζχ
1 are linearly independent
over every residue ﬁeld of O.
Proof. Write ζχ
0 = σ0 · θm, ζχ
1 = σ1 · θm.T h e n f r o m 1et(θm)= qm · Un · θm,1 et(ζχ
0 )=
χM(1)−1 · ζχ
0 , we obtain that if we set
ζχ def
= 1
2 + U
n · σ0
· ∂σ0
∂U
then 1et(ζχ)= ζχ − 1 (cf. the case of “classical Schottky-Weierstrass zeta function ζ”
discussed in Chapter III, §5 – especially Theorem 5.6). Note, here, that the operator
1
2 + U
n · ∂
∂U is integral (even at primes of O which divide 2 or n)o n χL-special monomials
in Case I: Indeed, in the notation of Schola 4.1, above, this operator acts on ket(M)b y
multiplication by 1
2 + 1
n · (2mk + m)= k + 1, and on ( −k)et(M ′) by multiplication by
1
2 + 1
n (−2mk − m)= −k.
In other words, in the terminology of Chapter IV,§3, “(σ0 ·θm)·T +(σ0 ·ζχ ·θm)” is an
“extension polynomial on whichZet ×μn acts viaχM.” Thus, we may takeζχ
1 = σ0 ·ζχ ·θm.
On the other hand, ζχ
0 modulo q may be computed as in the proof of Chapter IV,
Theorem 2.1, to be equal to (an A×-multiple of)
(Um + γ · U −m) · θm
(where γ is a root of unity). If we apply the operator 1
2 + U
n · ∂
∂U to the coeﬃcient of θm
in this expression, we obtain
Um · θm
Thus, since γ is a root of unity, hence ∈O ×, we obtain that these two expressions are
linearly independent over every residue ﬁeld of O, as desired. ⃝
Thus, we see that we have essentially proven the following result:
Theorem 4.6. Let χL ∈ Hom(Πn,(μn)S) be a character. Let j ≥ 2 be an integer. Then
the twisted Schottky-Weierstrass ζ-functions ζχ
0 ,... ,ζχ
j−1 (cf. Chapter IV, Theorem 3.1)
associated to χ
def
= χM satisfy the following:
173

Case I: χL,μ =1 .I f j =2 , then the reductions modulo q of ζχ
0 and ζχ
1
are linearly independent over A/(q)= O.I f j ≥ 3,l e tj0
def
=2 k +1 ≥ 3
be any odd integer such that j ≥ j0 ≥ 3.L e tϵCase
def
=1 .
Case II: χL,μ = χθ|μn .L e tj0
def
=2 k ≥ 2 be any even integer such that
j ≥ j0 ≥ 2.L e tϵCase
def
=0 .
Case III: χL,μ2 ̸=1 .L e tj0 ≥ 2 be any integer such that j ≥ j0 ≥ 2.
Let ϵCase
def
=0 .
In all the Cases, let B
def
= A/(qn·cj0 ). Then there exists a B-submodule R ⊆ Bj – i.e., a
submodule of relations – such that:
(i) ∑j−1
i=0 γi · ζχ
i ≡ 0 modulo qn·cj0 for all (γ0,... ,γj−1) ∈ R;
(ii) the projection R → Bj−j0+1 onto the last j − j0 +1 factors is an
isomorphism.
Finally, we have:
(∗) Any (γ0,... ,γj−1) ∈ Bj such that (γ0,... ,γj−1) ̸∈ q · Bj,a n d∑j−1
i=0 γi · ζχ
i ≡ 0 modulo qn·cj0 has at least one i ≥ Span(Cj0 )+
1+ ϵCase = j0 − 1= |Cj0 | (i.e., the cardinality of Cj0 ) such that
γi ̸≡ 0 modulo q.
In fact, this statement (∗) holds “modulo p” for any maximal prime p of O, i.e.:
(∗p) Any (γ0,... ,γj−1) ∈ Bj such that (γ0,... ,γj−1) ̸∈ (q, p) · Bj,a n d∑j−1
i=0 γi · ζχ
i ≡ 0 modulo ( qn·cj0 , p) has at least one i ≥ Span(Cj0 )+
1+ ϵCase = j0 − 1= |Cj0 | (i.e., the cardinality of Cj0 ) such that γi ̸≡
0 modulo (q, p).
Proof. Indeed, the statement ( ∗) was precisely what we proved above; its “modulo p”
version (∗p) follows by precisely the same argument. When j = 2 in Case I, Theorem 4.6
follows from Lemma 4.5. Thus, let us assume that we are in Case I and j ≥ 3, or that we
are in Cases II or III and j ≥ 2. To see that there exists a B-submodule R in each Case
satisfying properties (i) and (ii), let us ﬁrst observe that the map
174

(γ0,... ,γj−1) ↦→
j−1∑
i=0
γi · ζχ
i modulo qn·cj0
deﬁnes a B-linear morphism
Ξ: Bj →
{
B−linear combinations of the monomials ∈ Cj0 modulo qn·cj0
}
Note that because of the way in which j0 was chosen in each of the three cases (and
because of the way in which we deﬁned Cj0 ) it follows that Cj0 has cardinality j0 − 1.
We would like to show that the kernel of Ξ is isomorphic (as a B-module) to Bj−j0+1
(via the projection of (ii)). Suppose that we can show this after base-changing from O to
an arbitrary residue ﬁeld of O. Then it will follow from elementary commutative algebra
(by thinking about ﬁnitely generated modules over the principal ideal domain O) that the
kernel of Ξ is abstractly isomorphic to Bj−j0+1 as an O-module; moreover, the projection
of (ii) will then be a morphism between freeO-modules of the same rank which is bijective
modulo all of the maximal primes of O. Thus, it will follow that the projection of (ii)
is bijective over O, hence that Ker(Ξ) is isomorphic as a B-module to Bj−j0+1 via the
projection of (ii), as desired.
Thus, it suﬃces to show (i) and (ii) after base-changing to an arbitrary residue ﬁeld
of O. Let us denote the objects obtained by executing this base-change by means of a
subscript “res.” Then the range of Ξ res is a Bres-module which is a quotient of Bj0 −1
res .
In particular, it follows from elementary commutative algebra (since Bres is a quotient
of the principal ideal domain Ares) that there exists a Bres-submodule Rres ⊆ Bj
res that
satisﬁes (i) and which is ∼= Bj−j0+1
res . The fact that such anRres also satisﬁes (ii) is a formal
consequence of (∗p). This completes the proof of the “res” case, and hence of the entire
Theorem. ⃝
Remark. From a certain point of view, Theorem 4.6 is the key technical result behind the
main theorems of this paper.
Corollary 4.7. Let χL ∈ Hom(Πn,(μn)S) be a character. Let j ≥ 2 be an integer. Then
the twisted Schottky-Weierstrass ζ-functions ζχ
0 ,... ,ζχ
j−1 (cf. Chapter IV, Theorem 3.1)
satisfy the following property: Let j′ be deﬁned as follows:
Case I: Let j′ be the smallest odd integer ≥ j +1 .
Case II: Let j′ be the smallest even integer ≥ j +1 .
Case III: Let j′ def
= j +1 .
175

Let p be a maximal prime of O.T h e ni fγ0,... ,γj−1 ∈ A are such that
j−1∑
i=0
γi · ζχ
i ≡ 0 modulo qn·cj′ (respectively, modulo (qn·cj′ , p))
then all of the γi’s are ≡ 0 modulo q (respectively, modulo (q, p)). Finally, j′ satisﬁes the
property: |Cj′ | = j′ − 1 ≤ j +1 ;i f j is odd,t h e n|Cj′ | is = j +1 (in Case I), = j (in
Cases II, III); if j is even,t h e n|Cj′ | is = j +1 (in Case II), = j (in Cases I, III).
Proof. The ﬁnal statement follows immediately from the deﬁnitions. Thus, let us prove
the statement concerning linear independence. To simplify the notation, we prove the
result in the “non-resp’d” case. (The proof in the “resp’d” case is entirely similar.) First,
j
′ is deﬁned as “the smallest j0 (as in Theorem 4.6) which is≥ j+1.” Then if we letγi
def
=0
for i ≥ j, suppose that there exists some γi ̸≡ 0 modulo q, and apply the statement (∗)o f
Theorem 4.6, we obtain that there exists some i ≥ j′ − 1 ≥ j for which γi ̸≡ 0 modulo q.
But in light of the deﬁnition of the γi, this is absurd. This contradiction completes the
proof. ⃝
Finally, we close this § by observing that, although in the above discussion, we took
an abstract point of view with respect to showing the existence of linear combinations of
the ζ
χ
i satisfying certain congruence property modulo powers of q, in fact, it is possible to
give an explicit description of the linear combinations of ζχ
i ’s that arise. Indeed, one has
the following result:
Theorem 4.8. (Congruence Canonical Schottky-Weierstrass Zeta Functions)
Let σχ ∈ Γ(C∞
ˆS
,(L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
)χ) be as in Chapter IV, §3. Let iχ ∈{ −m, −m +1 ,... ,m − 1} be
as in Chapter IV, Theorem 3.3. (Note that this notation is consistent with the notation of
the present § for Case III.) Then, up to an A×-multiple, σχ is equal to the series
∑
k∈Z
qm·k2+iχ ·k · U2mk+iχ · θm · χ(ket)=
∑
k∈Z
ket(Uiχ · θm) · χ(ket)
Now if r is a nonnegative integer, let Lr(T)
def
= T + λr − iχ
2m,w h e r eλr ∈ Z is deﬁned as
follows:
λr
def
=
[r
2 + iχ
2m
]
i.e., the greatest integer ≤ the number in brackets. Then if we set ζCG
0 to be equal to the
above series, and
176

ζCG
r
def
=
(Lr(δ∗)
r
)
(ζCG
0 )=
∑
k∈Z
(k + λr
r
)
· qm·k2+iχ ·k · U2mk+iχ · θm · χ(ket)
ζCG
r [T]
def
=
(Lr(δ∗ + T)
r
)
(ζCG
0 )=
r∑
i=0
ζCG
i · T[r−i]
(where δ∗, T are as in Chapter IV, Theorem 3.3), then for any positive integerj, we have
ζCG
j−1 ≡ 0 modulo qn·cj0
(where j0 is as in Theorem 4.6). Finally, theζCG
r are integral overZ, and form a collection
of twisted higher Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functions as in Chapter IV, Theorem 3.1.
Proof. Note that the series given for (anA×-multiple of) σχ is Zet-invariant. On the other
hand, since the set of Zet-invariant elements of Γ(C∞
ˆS
,(L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
)χ) forms a free A-module of
rank 1, it follows immediately that σχ is an A×-multiple of this series. The explicit series
formula for ζCG
r then follows immediately. In particular, since Lr(k + iχ
2m) will always be
∈ Z, it follows immediately that ζCG
r is integral over Z.S i n c eδ∗ + T is Zet-invariant, it
follows immediately that the ζCG
r form a collection of twisted higher Schottky-Weierstrass
zeta functions as in Chapter IV, Theorem 3.1. In fact, one can even write the ζCG
r as
explicit linear combinations of the ζBI,χ
i ’s (of Chapter IV, Theorem 3.3) by using Chapter
III, Lemma 7.5.
Thus, it remains only to show that ζCG
j−1 has the desired congruence property.T h e
point here is to observe that if we deﬁne a ﬁltration Fr(Z)( f o rr ≥ 0 an integer) on Z by:
Fr(Z)
def
= {0 − λr,1 − λr,... ,r − 1 − λr }
then Fr+1(Z) is obtained fromFr(Z) by appending one more integer “k[r]” directly to the
left/right of Fr(Z) (where “left/right” depends only on the parity ofr), and, moreover,the
exponent of q in the χL-special monomial corresponding to this “k[r]”i s ≥ the exponents
of q in the χL-special monomial corresponding to the integers “k”i nFr(Z). In particular,
it follows that for each of the χL-special monomials
qm·k2+iχ ·k · U2mk+iχ · θm
belonging to Cj0 , Lj−1(k + iχ
2m)i sa nonnegative integer ≤ j − 2. Thus,
(Lj−1(k+
iχ
2m )
j−1
)
=0 .
That is to say, the coeﬃcients (in the series deﬁning ζCG
j−1)o fa l lt h eχL-special monomials
in Cj0 are zero. This proves the desired congruence property. ⃝
177

§5. The Determinant of the Evaluation Map
In this §, we prepare for the discussion of the following § by showing that (at least if
the base is an algebraically closed ﬁeld, and the elliptic curve in question is “suﬃciently
generic,” then) the determinants of the evaluation maps of Propositions 2.2, 2.3, have a
particularly simple form, so long as they are not identically zero (Theorem 5.6).
Here, we use the notation of§2, except that we also assume (unless speciﬁed otherwise)
that S =S p e c (k), where k is an algebraically closed ﬁeld.
Remark. In fact, logically speaking, we shall only use the theory of this§ in the case where
char(k) = 0. Thus, the reader who is only interested in material that is logically necessary
for the proofs of the main theorems of this paper may assume in this§ that char(k)=0 .
In particular, in this §, E → S will be a (proper!) elliptic curve, and S = S∞ . Thus, since
we do not have to deal with log structures, metrized line bundles, etc., the discussion of
§2 simpliﬁes substantially. Also, in this §, we will assume that
L = L = OE(d · [e])
and that we are given a symmetric Lagrangian subgroup
H ⊆G L
i.e., a Lagrangian subgroup which is mapped to itself under the automorphism of GL
induced by the automorphism ( −1) : E → E (“multiplication by −1”) of E.A l s o , w e
assume that H is of multiplicative type, i.e., thatH is ´etale locally isomorphic toμd. Since,
however, k is algebraically closed, this implies that H ∼= μd. Let us ﬁx an identiﬁcation:
H = KH = μd
Then
dEH = dE/KH ∼= H∗ = Z/dZ
(where the “ ∗” denotes the Cartier dual). In particular, under these assumptions, if
char(k)= p> 0, then it follows that E is an ordinary elliptic curve (i.e., its Hasse in-
variant is nonzero).
Conversely, if char(k)=0o r E is ordinary,t h e nIclaim that there exists a symmetric
Lagrangian subgroup H ⊆G L of multiplicative type. Indeed, by the discussion preceding
Chapter IV, Deﬁnition 1.3, it follows that the existence of such anH amounts to the issue
of whether or not a certain exact sequence Z-modules (character groups)
178

0 → Z/dZ → ?? → Z → 0
equipped with a Z/2Z = {±1}-action splits.I f d is odd, then the existence of such
a splitting follows from the fact that H1(Z/2Z,Z/dZ)=0 . I f d is even, and k is of
characteristic 0, the existence of such a splitting follows from “the existence of a symmetric
θ-structure on a totally symmetric ample line bundle” [Mumf1], Remark 2, p. 318. If d
is even, and k is of positive characteristic, then the existence of such a splitting follows
from the fact that the relevant class inH1(Z/2Z,Z/dZ) is locally constant, hence may be
computed after lifting the elliptic curve in question to characteristic 0. This completes the
veriﬁcation of the claim.
Thus, other than the condition that E be ordinary if char(k) > 0, the assumption of
the existence of an H as above does not result in any loss of generality.
The Lagrangian subgroup H ⊆G
L deﬁnes a line bundle LH on EH = E/KH which
descends L.S i n c eL and H ⊆G L are symmetric, it follows that LH is also symmetric.
Since LH is of degree 1, it thus follows that
LH ∼= OEH (ϵH)
for some unique ϵH ∈ EH(k), which satisﬁes 2 · ϵH =0 . I f G is a ﬁnite, ﬂat subgroup
scheme of E or EH,l e tu sw r i t e[G] for the divisor in E or EH deﬁned by G. We will also
use this notation for translates of G. Before continuing our discussion, we need certain
basic facts concerning the various line bundles that appear:
Lemma 5.1. We have:
[KH] ∼ (d − 1) · [e]+[ δ]
where “ ∼” denotes linear equivalence of divisors onE; δ= e if d is odd; and δ=( 1
2 )μ ∈
KH(k) ⊆ E(k), i.e., the unique generator of the subgroup μ2(k) ⊆ μd(k)= KH(k),i f d is
even.
Proof. Indeed, this sort of equality may be proven by lifting to characteristic 0. Thus,
for the rest of the proof, we assume that char(k)=0 . T h e nKH is ´etale over k,s o
[KH]=
∑
α∈KH(k)
[α]
If α ∈ KH(k) is such that α ̸= −α,t h e nb o t h[α]a n d[ −α] appear in the sum, and
[α]+[ −α] ∼ 2[e]. Moreover, the only [α]’s such that α = −α are [e]a n d[δ]. Substituting
these two observations into the above sum thus yields the result. ⃝
179

Lemma 5.2. We have: ϵH = eH (the origin of EH)i f d is odd; ϵH ∈ dEH(k) if d is
even and char(k)=2 ;a n dϵH ∈ EH(k)\dEH(k) is of order precisely 2 if d is even and
char(k) ̸=2 .
Proof. Suppose ﬁrst that d is odd. Then since the line bundle L = OE(d · [e]) is not ﬁxed
by translation by any point ofE(k) of order precisely 2, and, moreover, the points of order
2o f E(k) are in bijective correspondence with the points of order 2 ofEH(k), the fact that
ϵH = eH follows from the fact that L ∼= OE([KH]) (cf. Lemma 5.1).
Now suppose that d is even and char(k) = 2. In this case, Z/2Z ⊆ Z/dZ ∼= dEH(k)i s
equal to the entire set of points in EH(k) annihilated by 2. Thus, ϵH ∈ dEH(k).
Finally, suppose that d is even and char(k) ̸= 2. Since we know that 2 · ϵH =0 ,i t
follows that it suﬃces to prove thatϵH ̸∈ dEH(k). Next, observe that since there exists an
isomorphism dE ∼= H × H∗ such that the projection to the factor H∗ coincides with the
morphism dE → dEH ∼= H∗, it follows that there exists an element˜ϵ ∈ E(k) whose order is
precisely 2 and which maps to the nonzero element of Z/2Z ⊆ Z/dZ ∼= dEH(k) ⊆ EH(k).
On the other hand, by Lemma 5.1, we have OE([KH]) = (d − 1) · [e]+[ ( 1
2 )μ] ̸∼= L,s o
ϵH ̸= eH.S i n c eT ∗
˜ϵ (L) ∼= L (here we use the fact that d is even), it thus follows that
OE([˜ϵ + KH]) ̸∼= L, which implies that ϵH is not equal to the image of ˜ϵ in EH(k). Thus,
we conclude that ϵH ̸∈ dEH(k), as desired. ⃝
Corollary 5.3. Suppose that d is odd, or that d is even and char(k)=2 .T h e n[ϵH +
dEH]=[ dEH] (an equality, not just a linear equivalence, of divisors onEH).
Let us write M
def
= OEH ([ϵH + dEH]). Note that there is an evident action of dEH on
M (resulting from the fact that dEH stabilizes the divisor [ϵH + dEH]). If one descends
to M to E = EH/dEH via this action, then the resulting line bundle on E is simply
OEH ([ϵ])
where ϵ ∈ E(k) is the image of ϵH.
Lemma 5.4. Suppose that d is even, and char(k) ̸=2 .L e t Lχ be the line bundle on
E = EH/dEH given by descending the line bundleM relative to the action ofdEH ∼= Z/dZ
on M given by twisting the evident action by the unique nontrivial character χ : dEH ∼=
Z/dZ → μ2 = {±1} of order 2.T h e nLχ ∼= OE(e).
Proof. Clearly, deg(Lχ) = 1. Since 2 · ϵH =0 ,a n d χ⊗2 = 1, it follows that Lχ is
symmetric.T h u s ,Lχ ∼= OE(ϵχ), for some unique ϵχ ∈ E(k), which is necessarily of order
2. As observed above, if one descends M via the evident action of dEH on M,o n eg e t s
OEH ([ϵ]), where ϵ ∈ E(k) is the image of ϵH.M o r e o v e r ,ϵ =( 1
2 )μ (by Lemma 5.2). Since
180

the kernel of the morphism Pic0(E) → Pic0(EH) induced by EH → E = EH/dEH has a
unique element of order precisely 2, it follows thatϵχ is the unique element ofE(k)o fo r d e r
≤ 2 such that ϵχ ̸= ϵ, OE(ϵχ)|EH
∼= M. But observe that OE(e)|EH = OEH ([dEH]) ∼= M
(where the last isomorphism follows from the fact that M is of even degree, hence ﬁxed
by translation by ϵH, which is order 2). Thus, we conclude that ϵχ = e, as desired. ⃝
Corollary 5.5. Suppose that 0 ̸= s ∈ Γ(EH, M) has the following property with respect
to the evident action of dEH on M: s is ﬁxed by this action if d is odd, or if d is even and
char(k)=2 ; dEH acts on s by the characterχ (of Lemma 5.4) ifd is even andchar(k) ̸=2 .
Then the inverse image in E via E → EH = E/KH of the zero locus V (s) of s is equal to
the divisor [dE].
Proof. Indeed, if d is odd, or if d is even and char(k)=2 ,t h e ns descends to a nonzero
section s′ ∈ Γ(EH, OE(ϵ)). Since OE(ϵ)i so fd e g r e e1 ,V (s′)=[ ϵ]. Thus, V (s)=[ ϵH +
dEH]=[ dEH] (by Corollary 5.3), so the inverse image in E of V (s)i s[ dE], as desired.
If d is even and char( k) ̸= 2, then (by Lemma 5.4) s descends to a nonzero section
s′ ∈ Γ(EH, OE(e)). Since OE(e)i so fd e g r e e1 ,V (s′)=[ e], so the inverse image in E of
V (s)i s[ dE], as desired. ⃝
Now we are ready to return to our discussion of the evaluation maps of §2. In the
present discussion, we shall omit the symbol “ ∞ ” from the various notations of §2, since
here, S = S∞ , E = E∞ , etc. We would like to consider the morphism ΞH
L,d,α of Proposition
2.3, for a point α ∈ E† (k). Write
V
def
=Γ (E†
H,[d], LH |
E†
H,[d]
)<d
Also, let us denote the elements of dEH = Z/dZ by ( i
d)H,f o ri =0 ,... ,d − 1. Then the
morphism of Proposition 2.3 becomes
ΞH
α : V →
d−1⨁
i=0
{
OEH ([ϵH +( i
d)H])|α
}
(where we identify LH with OEH ([ϵH])).
Now let β ∈ dE†
H(k) ∼= dEH(k). We would like to consider the relationship between
ΞH
α and ΞH
α+β. Note that both maps involve restricting sections ∈ V to the same points
inside E†
H,[d], except in a diﬀerent order. Thus, one may think of Ξ H
α+β as the result of
composing ΞH
α with the permutation of the summands in the direct sum on the right
(which are indexed by i =0 ,... ,d − 1) by the permutation i ↦→ i + iβ modulo d (where
181

(iβ
d )H ∈ dEH(k) is the element deﬁned by β). Thus, if one takes determinants, one obtains
that the determinant
det(ΞH
α+β) ∈ det(V )−1 ⊗k OEH ([ϵH + dEH])|α
is equal to
(−1)sgn(β) · det(ΞH
α ) ∈ det(V )−1 ⊗k OEH ([ϵH + dEH])|α
where sgn(β) is the sign of the permutation i ↦→ i + iβ modulo d. Note that if d is odd,
or if d is even and char(k) = 2, then (−1)sgn(β) is always 1. If d is even and char(k) ̸=2 ,
then (−1)sgn(β) = χ(β), where χ is the character of Lemma 5.4. Thus, if one lets α be the
tautological point ∈ E† (E† ), one gets a section
det(ΞH
α ) ∈ det(V )−1 ⊗k Γ(E† , OEH ([ϵH + dEH])|α)
which, by Lemma 2.4, descends to E. Moreover, clearly this determinant of Ξ H
α only
depends on the image of α in EH. Thus, since this image is just the tautological point
∈ EH(EH), we get a section
det(ΞH
α ) ∈ det(V )−1 ⊗k Γ(EH, OEH ([ϵH + dEH])) = det(V )−1 ⊗k Γ(EH, M)
which, by the above discussion, satisﬁes the hypotheses of Corollary 5.5 (as soon as it is
nonzero). In other words, we see that the zero locus of det(ΞH
α )o n E is equal either to all
of E or to [dE]. That is to say, we have proven the following:
Theorem 5.6. Let E be an elliptic curve over an algebraically closed ﬁeld k.S u p p o s e
that E is ordinary if char(k) > 0.L e td ≥ 1 be an integer; L
def
= OE(d·[e]);a n dα ∈ E† (k).
Then if the morphism
ΞL,d,α :Γ (E†
[d], L|
E†
[d]
)<d →L |
T ∗
α (dE† )
is an isomorphism for any single α ∈ E† (k), then it follows that it is an isomorphism for
all α ∈ E† (k) except for those which map to dE(k) ⊆ E(k). Moreover, if this morphism
is an isomorphism for any single α ∈ E† (k), then the scheme-theoretic zero locus of the
determinant of this morphism in the case where α is the tautological point ∈ E† (E† ) is
precisely d times the divisor E† ×E (dE) ⊆ E† . Finally, the same (except with “ d times”
in the preceding sentence deleted) assertions hold for the morphism
182

ΞH
L,d,α :Γ (E†
H,[d], LH |
E†
H,[d]
)<d →L H |
T ∗
α (dE†
H)
where H ⊆G L is any Lagrangian subgroup (cf. Chapter IV, Deﬁnition 1.3).
Proof. It remains only to note that, in the statement of Theorem 5.6, it is not necessary
to assume that the Lagrangian subgroup is symmetric or of multiplicative type. Indeed,
the assertions in the statement of Theorem 5.6 concerning the Lagrangian subgroup follow
immediately from the general theory of§2, especially Proposition 2.3; Chapter IV, Theorem
1.4. Note that we need the “ d times” in the “non-Lagrangian case” because the matrices
appearing in the non-Lagrangian case amount essentially tod copies (arranged diagonally)
of the matrices appearing in the Lagrangian case. Thus, the determinants must be raised
to the d-th power. ⃝
§6. The Generic Case
In this §, we give an explicit computation of a certain evaluation map (i.e., a map
like that deﬁned in §2) deﬁned for certain degenerating elliptic curves in mixed character-
istic. In particular, we will show that the determinant of this map is nonzero in mixed
characteristic. This result, combined with the results of §5, will allow us to conclude the
generic bijectivity of certain evaluation maps in mixed characteristic. Moreover, this sort
of generic bijectivity result will be the crucial technical ingredient in the proof of the main
results of Chapter VI.
In this §, we use the notation of the ﬁrst portion of §3, i.e., the discussion of the
degenerating case (preceding the “Analytic Continuation Argument”). Let N ≥ 1b ea n
integer which is prime to d and invertible in the base ring O (a Zariski localization of
the ring of integers of a number ﬁeld). Let p be a prime number that appears as the
characteristic of a residue ﬁeld of O. We would like to concentrate our attention, in this
§,o n integral structures at the prime p.L e t
A
N
def
= O[[q
1
N ·d ]]; SN
def
=S p e c (O[[q
1
N ·d ]]) = Spec(AN )
Thus, we have a natural ﬁnite morphism SN → S, which we regard as a “base extension”
of the base S =S p e c (O[[q]]) of (the ﬁrst portion of) §3. Note that if one thinks of ˜E as
being “Gm/qd·Z”t h e nqd/N ∈ Gm(USN )( w h e r eUSN
def
=S p e c (AN [q−1]) (⊆ SN )) deﬁnes a
rational point
η ∈ ˜Cd(SN )
183

which, relative to the group structure on ˜Cd over US, is annihilated by N. Similarly,
q ∈ Gm(USN ) deﬁnes a rational point
τ ∈ ˜Ed(S) ⊆ ˜Cd(SN )
which is a torsion point of order d. In particular, by using the group scheme structure on
˜Ed (together with the fact that the action of ˜Ed on itself extends to an action of ˜Ed on
˜Cd), we may also form the points
η· τβ ∈ ˜Cd(SN )
(for β ∈ Z). (Here, we use the letter “ β” so that our notation will be consistent with the
notation in the discussion of d-torsion points in §3.) Note that, relative to the theory of
Chapter IV, §4, the point of the “S1” associated to ˜E deﬁned by τ (respectively, η· τβ)i s
equal to 1
d (respectively, 1
N + β
d ).
Next, let us write e ˜Ed
⊆ ˜E(S) for the identity element of the group scheme ˜E.W r i t e
˜L
def
= O ˜Cd
(e˜Ed
)
for the corresponding line bundle on ˜Cd. Note that since the points η· τβ do not intersect
e ˜Ed
, it follows that the restriction of the line bundle ˜L to any of these points η· τβ admits
a natural trivialization.I n t h i s§, we would like to consider the following evaluation map
(cf. the evaluation maps deﬁned in §2):
Ξη :Γ ( ˜Cd, ˜L⊗ O˜Cd
Fd(Ret
E†
˜Cd,[d]
)) ⊗OS OSN −→
d−1⨁
β=0
( ˜L|η·τβ )=
d−1⨁
β=0
OSN
given by restriction. Note that here, to deﬁne the evaluation map Ξη, we use the facts that
(i) Ret
E†
˜Cd,[d]
⊗ Q = R
E†
˜Cd,[d]
⊗ Q; (ii) in characteristic zero, the torsion pointsη,τ ∈ ˜Cd(SN )
lift naturally to torsion points of E†
˜Cd,[d]
(SN ⊗ Q) (where “torsion” refers to the group
structure on E†
˜Cd,[d]
|USN
). This much gives us a map Ξ η ⊗ Q; to see that Ξ η is, in fact,
deﬁned without tensoring with Q, we need an integrality statement like that at the end of
Theorem 3.1. The reason we cannot apply the integrality statement at the end of Theorem
3.1 directly is that instead of restricting to d-torsion points (i.e., τβ’s), we are restricting
to d-torsion points shifted by η. This is not a problem, however, since, just as in the proof
of the integrality statement at the end of Theorem 3.1, we see that it suﬃces to prove that
the “ T
[n]’s” (notation of the ﬁrst part of §3) take on integral values for T = d
N + β.B u t
184

since we assumed thatN ∈O ×, this is an easy exercise. (For instance, it may be proven by
observing that it suﬃces to prove it locally at an arbitrary prime numberl not dividing N;
but then d
N may be l-adically approximated by an integer, and it is well-known that T[n]
takes integral values at integers; thus, the integrality of T[n] for T = d
N + β at the prime
l follows from the fact that Zl is l-adically closed in Ql.) This completes the deﬁnition of
Ξη.
In this §, we would like to study the extent to whichΞη is an isomorphism.T od ot h i s ,
we would like to compute the determinant of Ξη. To compute this determinant explicitly,
we must introduce various explicit bases of the domain and range of Ξ η. Note that the
range of Ξη already has a natural basis (over OSN ) given by the fact that it is naturally a
direct sum of copies of OSN . Next, we consider the domain of Ξη. To simplify notation,
l e tu sw r i t e
V
def
=Γ ( ˜Cd, ˜L⊗ O˜Cd
Fd(Ret
E†
˜Cd,[d]
)) ⊗OS OSN
Note that V has a natural ﬁltration Fn(V ), induced by the ﬁltration on Ret
E†
˜Cd,[d]
(cf.
Theorem 3.1). For 0 ≤ n ≤ d − 1, the subquotient (Fn+1/Fn)(V ) is a (locally) free OSN -
module of rank 1. By further localizing O, we may assume that these modules are, in fact,
free, hence generated (over OSN ) by some φn ∈ Fn+1(V ), where 0 ≤ n ≤ d − 1. Thus,
φ0,... ,φd−1
form a basis of V over OSN .
Next, let us recall the inﬁnite ´etale covering C∞
ˆS
→ C∞
ˆS
/(d · Zet)=( ˜Cd)ˆS.W ew o u l d
like to pull-back the various sectionsφi (for i =0 ,... ,d − 1) over ( ˜Cd)SN
def
= ˜Cd ×S SN to
C∞
ˆSN
def
= C∞
ˆS
×ˆS
ˆSN . If we do this, then it follows from the deﬁnition of the “ Ret”i n §3
(and Chapter III, §6) that we can write
φi =
i∑
j=0
ζi,j · T[j]
where ζi,j ∈ Γ(C∞
ˆSN
, ˜L|C∞
ˆSN
). Note, moreover, that for each i =0 ,... ,d − 1, the section ζi,i
descends to ( ˜Cd)SN (cf. the theory of Chapter III, §6). Since φi generates (Fi+1/Fi)(V ),
and restriction of sections of Γ(( ˜Cd)SN , ˜L( ˜Cd)SN
)t o η clearly deﬁnes an isomorphism
Γ(( ˜Cd)SN , ˜L( ˜Cd)SN
) ∼= OSN
185

it follows that ζi,i(η) ∈O ×
SN . Thus, by replacing φi by an appropriate O×
SN -multiple of φi,
we may assume that the φi’s have been normalized so that, for i =0 ,... ,d − 1, we have
ζi,i(η)=1
(cf. the theory of Chapter III, §6).
Now we are ready to compute the determinant of Ξη. Relative to the bases chosen
above, this amounts to computing the determinant of the matrix
M = {Mi,β }
where i, β=0 ,... ,d − 1, and
Mi,β
def
= φi(η∞ · τβ
∞ )=
i∑
j=0
ζi,j(η∞ · τβ
∞ ) · (T[j]|T= d
N +β)
Here, η∞ ∈ C∞
ˆSN
( ˆSN ), τ∞ ∈ C∞
ˆSN
( ˆSN ) are the points deﬁned by q
d
N ,q ∈ Gm(USN ), respec-
tively, by thinking ofC∞
ˆSN
as (the q-adic completion of) a sort of N´eron modelfor Gm over
USN (cf. the discussion at the beginning of Chapter III, §5). Thus, η∞ , τ∞ project to η,
τ, respectively.
We would like to show that the determinant in question is invertible as a section of
OSN . Since sections of OSN are invertible if and only if they are invertible modulo q
1
N ,
it thus follows that it suﬃces to show that det(M) is invertible modulo q
1
N .T h u s ,i nt h e
following computations, we will work modulo q
1
N .
Next, let us observe that,modulo q
1
N , the rational pointsη∞ ·τβ
∞ (for β =0 ,... ,d − 1)
of C∞
ˆSN
over ˆSN all lie in the irreducible components of the special ﬁber of C∞
ˆSN
labeled
1,... ,d − 1 (cf. the discussion at the beginning of Chapter III, §5). Indeed, these d − 1
irreducible components include a total of precisely d nodes, and it is these d nodes which
are images of the η∞ · τβ
∞ (for β =0 ,... ,d − 1) modulo q
1
N . On the other hand, the
restriction of the line bundle ˜L to the union of thesed − 1 irreducible components is clearly
equal to the trivial bundle.L e tu sw r i t eU for the union of these d − 1c o m p o n e n t s .T h e n
U is a chain of d − 1 copies of P1 over O.I np a r t i c u l a r ,U is reduced and connected, so it
follows that
Γ(U, ˜L|U )= O
i.e., sections of ˜L are constant over U, hence, in particular, assume the same values at the
points η∞ · τβ
∞ (for β =0 ,... ,d − 1) that we are interested in.
Thus, modulo q
1
N ,w eh a v e :
186

Mi,β ≡
i∑
j=0
ζi,j(η∞ ) · (T[j]|T= d
N +β)
Now we would like to perform various elementary row operations on this matrix. Here,
we think of the matrix entries (i, β)w h e r ei is ﬁxed and β varies as a row. Thus, we will
speak of “the row ( i, ∼).” Note ﬁrst of all that the row (0, ∼) consists of 1’s, i.e.,
(0,β) ≡ ζ0,0(η∞ ) · (T[0]|T= d
N +β)=1
(where “ ≡” in the following discussion will always mean “moduloq
1
N ”). Now I claim that
by performing elementary row operations on the matrixM, one may transform this matrix
(modulo q
1
N )i n t oam a t r i xM′ = {M ′
i,β },w h e r e
M ′
i,β ≡ ζi,i(η∞ ) · (T[i]|T= d
N +β)= T[i]|T= d
N +β
Indeed, we prove this for each row (i, ∼) by induction oni. First of all, it is clearly already
true for i = 0. The induction step is then proven by observing that the diﬀerence between
the original row (i, ∼)o f M and the row (i, ∼)o f M′ is
≡
i−1∑
j=0
ζi,j(η∞ ) · (T[j]|T= d
N +β)
i.e., the “diﬀerence row” may be thought of as the sum (for j =0 ,... ,i − 1) of rows of
the form: “the constant ζi,j(η∞ )t i m e st h er o w(j, ∼)o f M′.” Since for j<i ,w eh a v e
already converted the row (j, ∼)o f M into the row (j, ∼)o f M′ by means of elementary
row operations (by the induction hypothesis), we thus see that further elementary row
operations will allow us to convert the row ( i, ∼)o f M into the row ( i, ∼)o f M′,a s
desired. This completes the proof of the claim.
Thus, it suﬃces to prove that det(M′) is invertible.S i n c e
M ′
i,β ≡ T[i]|T= d
N +β
this amounts to an elementary and explicit calculation. Of course, one may perform this
calculation explicitly, but one indirect way to show that this determinant is invertible is
the following: It suﬃces to show that this determinant is invertible at every prime l that
does not divide N.A ts u c ha nl, d
N may be l-adically approximated byintegers.M o r e o v e r ,
since Z×
l is an l-adically closed subset of Ql, it thus suﬃces to prove that the determinant
is invertible when d
N is replaced by an arbitrary I ∈ Z. Thus, it suﬃces to show the
invertibility of the matrix M′′[I]= {M ′′
i,β[I]},w h e r e
187

M ′′
i,β[I]= T[i]|T=I+β
But now let us note that by repeated application of the relationδ(T[i])= T[i−1], one veriﬁes
easily that M′′[I] may be converted intoM′′[I +1] by means of elementary row operations.
In particular, det( M′′[I]) is independent of I,s o it suﬃces to show that det(M′′[0]) is
invertible.B u t
M ′′
i,β[0] = T[i]|T=β
is 0 if β<i ,a n d1i f β = i. That is to say, the matrix M′′[0] is upper triangular, with 1’s
along the diagonal. Thus,
det(M′′[0]) = 1
as desired. In other words, we have proven the following result:
Lemma 6.1. The evaluation map
Ξη :Γ ( ˜Cd, ˜L⊗ O˜Cd
Fd(Ret
E†
˜Cd,[d]
)) ⊗OS OSN −→
d−1⨁
β=0
( ˜L|η·τβ )=
d−1⨁
β=0
OSN
is an isomorphism.
Now we would like to consider the consequences of Lemma 6.1, in light of the theory
of §5.T od ot h i s ,l e tp be a generic point of SN ⊗ Fp.W r i t e
W
def
=S p e c (ˆOSN ,p)
Thus, W is a trait, i.e., the spectrum of a discrete valuation ring (of mixed characteristic).
Let us write pW for the closed point of W. In the following, we would like to work over
W. To do this, we ﬁrst pull-back the various objects that we have been working with over
SN to W. Thus, we obtain a torsor
˜E†
W,[d] → ˜EW
together with a line bundle ˜LW on ˜EW ,a n da d-torsion point τW ∈ ˜EW (W). In the
following discussion, we will often wish to base-change from W to the bases X
def
= ˜EW ,
188

Y
def
= ˜E†
W,[d]. When we wish to think of these objects not as group schemes over W, but
rather as base extensions of W, we will use the notation “ X,” “Y ”f o r ˜EW , ˜E†
W,[d].W e
will denote the result of base-changing objects over W (which have a subscript “ W”) to
objects over X and Y by means of a subscript X or Y . Finally, let us write
δX ∈ ˜EX(X)= ˜EW (X); δY
def
= δX |Y ∈ ˜EW (Y ); δ†
Y ∈ ˜E†
Y,[d](Y )= ˜E†
W,[d](Y )
for the tautological points given by the respective identity maps.
Next, we would like to consider the following evaluation map (where the requisite
integrality follows from the statement at the end of Theorem 3.1):
ΞT
X : V T
X
def
=Γ ( ˜EX,(T ∗
δX
˜LX) ⊗O˜EX
Fd(Ret
˜E†
X,[d]
)) −→
d−1⨁
β=0
(T ∗
δX
˜LX)|τβ
X
(where TδX : ˜EX → ˜EX is the morphism given by translation by the point δX ∈ ˜EX(X))
of locally free OX-modules of rank d.W r i t eηW for the pull-back of the torsion point η of
Lemma 6.1 to a point of X(W)= ˜EW (W). Note that since N ∈O ×
W ,a n dηW is an N-
torsion point, it follows thatηW lifts naturally to a uniqueN-torsion pointη†
W ∈ ˜E†
W,[d](W)
(cf. Chapter III, Corollary 5.9). Moreover, since d
N is a p-adic integer, translation by d
N
preserves the “T[n]” (overSN or overW). Thus, we see that the morphismT
η†
W
(translation
by η†
W )o n ˜E†
W,[d] induces a ﬁltration-preserving automorphism
T ∗
η†
W
[Ret]: Ret
˜E†
W,[d]
→R et
˜E†
W,[d]
Thus, we get an isomorphism
T ∗
η†
W
[V ]: Γ ( ˜EW , ˜LW ⊗O˜EW
Fd(Ret
˜E†
W,[d]
)) ∼= Γ( ˜EW ,(T ∗
ηW
˜LW ) ⊗O˜EW
Fd(Ret
˜E†
W,[d]
))
But now observe that the domain of T ∗
η†
W
[V ]i ss i m p l yVW (i.e., the pull-back to W of the
OSN -module “ V ” that we considered earlier), while the range of T ∗
η†
W
[V ]i s η∗
W (V T
X ), i.e.,
the restriction of the OX-module V T
X considered above to the pointηW ∈ X(W). Relative
189

to these observations, we thus see that the restriction toW of the morphism Ξη of Lemma
6.1 may be thought of as:
Ξη|W = η∗
W (ΞT
X
) ◦T ∗
η†
W
[V ]
In particular, it follows from Lemma 6.1 that det(Ξ T
X) (which is naturally a section of a
certain line bundle on the scheme X) is not identically zero on (the irreducible scheme)
X ⊗ (OW /pW ). In other words, the vanishing locus of det(ΞT
X) is ﬁnite and ﬂat over W,
hence is determined by its restriction to the generic ﬁber of X = ˜EW → W.
Next, we would like to work over the base Y = ˜E†
W,[d]. Note that over Y ,t r a n s l a t i o n
by δ†
Y deﬁnes an isomorphism
T ∗
δ†
Y
[V ]: Γ ( ˜EY , ˜LY ⊗O˜EY
Fd(Ret
˜E†
Y,[d]
)) ⊗ Q ∼= Γ( ˜EY ,(T ∗
δY
˜LY ) ⊗O˜EY
Fd(Ret
˜E†
Y,[d]
)) ⊗ Q
Note that here, we must tensor withQ since (one may easily check that)δ†
Y does not pre-
serve the “et-integral structure Ret”o f§3. Next, let us consider the “composite evaluation
map”:
ΞT
X |Y ◦T ∗
δ†
Y
[V ]: Γ ( ˜EY , ˜LY ⊗O˜EY
Fd(Ret
˜E†
Y,[d]
)) ⊗ Q −→
d−1⨁
β=0
(T ∗
δY
˜LY )|τβ
Y
⊗ Q
Now, sorting through the notation, one sees that this composite evaluation map is (up
to translation by the torsion point “ ϵH”o f §5) the same as the evaluation map denoted
“Ξ H
α ”i n §5. Since the determinant of this evaluation map is not identically zero (by what
we did in the preceding paragraph), it thus follows from Theorem 5.6, that (if we denote
by ϵW ∈ ˜EW (W)= X(W)t h ep o i n td e n o t e db y“ϵH”i n §5), we thus obtain that the
vanishing locus of the determinant of this composite evaluation map is given by the divisor∑d−1
β=0 [ϵW ·τβ
W ] on ˜EW ⊗Q. Combining this with what we did in the preceding paragraph,
we thus conclude that:
The vanishing locus of det(ΞT
X) is given by the divisor ∑d−1
β=0 [ϵW · τβ
W ]
on X = ˜EW .
Now recall the semi-abelian scheme E → S considered at the beginning of §3. One
may think of ˜E as being the quotient E → ˜E of E by a subgroup scheme of E which is
naturally isomorphic to μd. Alternatively, relative to Schottky uniformizations, one may
190

think of the isogenyE → ˜E as corresponding to the morphismGm/qZ → Gm/qd·Z induced
by the morphism “raising to the d- t hp o w e r ”o nGm. If we pull-back the isogeny E → ˜E
to W, we get an isogeny
EW → ˜EW
When we wish to think of EW → W as a base extension of W, we will denote EW by
Z
def
= EW ,a n dw r i t eγZ ∈ EW (Z) for the identity morphism. Finally, we will denote the
pull-backs of the torsor E†
[d] → E to W, Z by E†
W,[d] → EW , E†
Z,[d] → EZ, respectively.
If we let LW
def
= OEW (eEW )( w h e r eeEW is the origin of EW ), then we have an
evaluation map for EZ (where the requisite integrality follows from the statement at the
end of Theorem 3.1):
ΠT
Z :Γ ( EZ,(T ∗
γZ L⊗d
Z ) ⊗OEZ
Fd(Ret
E†
Z,[d]
)) −→ (T ∗
γZ L⊗d
Z )|(dEZ)
(Here dEZ ⊆ EZ is the subgroup scheme of d-torsion points in EZ.) Thus, one observes,
relative to the theory of §5, that for an appropriate choice of “Lagrangian subgroup H”
(which lifts μd ⊆ E), the evaluation maps Π T
Z and ΞT
X
correspond to one another (up to
translation by ϵW ) with respect to the operation of “taking invariants with respect to the
Lagrangian subgroup” (cf. the discussion of §5). Thus, we obtain the following result,
which is the main result of this §:
Theorem 6.2. For any integerd ≥ 1, the scheme-theoretic zero locus of the determinant
of the evaluation map
ΠT
Z :Γ ( EZ,(T ∗
γZ L⊗d
Z ) ⊗OEZ
Fd(Ret
E†
Z,[d]
)) −→ (T ∗
γZ L⊗d
Z )|(dEZ)
on Z = EW is given precisely by d · [dEZ] ⊆ EZ,w h e r e[dEZ] is the divisor deﬁned by the
kernel of multiplication by d on EZ.
Here, W is a trait of mixed characteristic (0,p); EW → W is an elliptic curve with
the property that the moduli of the special ﬁber overW are generic in characteristicp; LW
is the line bundle deﬁned by the identity element on EW ; EZ
def
= EW ×W Z, LZ = LW |Z;
γZ ∈ EZ(Z)= EW (Z) is the point deﬁned by the identity morphism; TγZ is translation by
the point γZ; E†
Z,[d] is the torsor “ E†
[d]” (cf. §2) for the elliptic curve EZ;a n dRet
E†
Z,[d]
is
the “et-integral structure” (cf. Deﬁnition 3.2) on the ﬁltered sheaf of functions R
E†
Z,[d]
on
E†
Z,[d].
191

Note that in the above proof, we made essential use of the μd-isogeny (i.e., isogeny
whose kernel may be identiﬁed with μd)
E → ˜E
That is to say, we proved Theorem 6.2, which essentially concerns objects over E,b y
descending objects on E to ˜E via this isogeny, and then analyzing the resulting objects
over ˜E (cf. the discussion preceding Lemma 6.1). In fact, however, one can also give a
proof of Theorem 6.2 by descending with respect to the Z/dZ-isogeny
˜Ed → E
(cf. §3 for an explanation of the notation – roughly speaking, this is the isogeny that looks
like the isogeny
“Gm/qdZ → Gm/qZ”
arising from the identity Gm → Gm on Gm), and then applying the theory developed in
§4 to the descended objects on E. The advantage of the μd-isogeny proof given above is
that it allows one to calculate the relevant matrixvery explicitly (up to the elementary row
operations) without much preparation, and is independent of the rather technical theory
discussed in §4. On the other hand, once one assumes the theory of §4, the proof of
Theorem 6.2 is relatively short and proceeds as follows:
Alternate Proof of Theorem 6.2:
We omit various “general nonsense” details concerning “descent with respect to the
isogeny in question” and “base-change to W” that were discussed extensively in the pre-
ceding proof of Theorem 6.2 and which are the same in both proofs.
Recall from the discussion of§3t h a tE†
˜Cd,[d]
, i.e., the “E†
[d]”f o r˜Cd, is precisely the pull
back via the compactiﬁed isogeny ˜Cd → C of the usual universal extension torsorE†
C → C
over C (⊇ E). Moreover, it also follows from the discussion of §3 that the ´etale-integral
structure on E†
˜Cd,[d]
is precisely the pull-back of the ´etale-integral structure deﬁned on E†
C
in Chapter III, Proposition 6.1. Thus, in summary, although we are ultimately interested
in proving the result (i.e., bijectivity) for the evaluation map for functions in Ret
E†
˜Cd,[d]
,i t
suﬃces (assuming that we can descend the relevant line bundle on ˜Cd down to C –c f .t h e
following paragraph) to prove the result for the evaluation map for functions in Ret
E†
C
.
192

The ﬁnal detail that we must take care of before we discuss the relevant evaluation
map on C is the speciﬁcation of the relevant line bundle on ˜Cd. More precisely, this “line
bundle on ˜Cd” will be a metrized line bundle on ˜E∞ ,S. Moreover, we want this metrized
line bundle to descend to a metrized line bundle on E∞ ,S via the Z/dZ-isogeny ˜Ed → E.
We take this metrized line bundle on ˜E∞ ,S to be
˜Lst,˜η (respectively, ˜L
ev
st,˜η)
if d is odd (respectively,even) – i.e., the metrized line bundles “Lst,η,” “L
ev
st,η”o f§1f o r˜E∞ ,S
(as opposed to E∞ ,S). Here, ˜ηis the torsion point of ˜E∞ ,S(SN ) deﬁned by qN ∈ Gm(USN )
(where we think of ˜E∞ ,S as “ Gm/qdZ). Thus, it remains only to see that the metrized
line bundle that we have chosen descends via ˜Ed → E. Going back to the deﬁnition of
˜Lst,˜η, ˜L
ev
st,˜η in §1, we see that these metrized line bundles are obtained by translating “˜Lst,”
“ ˜L
ev
st ”b y ˜η and then adding various d-invariant ψ’s. Since it is clear that the d-invariant
ψ’s descend, it thus suﬃces to see that ˜Lst, ˜L
ev
st descend. But this is clear from the explicit
forms of these line bundles given in Chapter IV, Lemma 5.4. Let us denote the resulting
descended metrized line bundle on E
∞ ,S by
L
Note that L has relative degree1 over the base. Moreover, the curvature of L is the same
same as the curvature of OC(eC)( w h e r eeC is the identity element ∈ C(S)o f C). Thus,
one may think of L as a sort of twisted form of OC(eC). This “twist” may be resolved
by pulling back to an appropriate covering of C (cf. Chapter IV, §2,3; §4 of the present
Chapter). Since this twist is deﬁned by η (
def
= the image of ˜η in E∞ ,S), and η does not lie
in the identity component of the special ﬁber of E∞ ,S (a consequence of the fact thatN is
assumed to be prime tod), it follows that the twist applied toOC(eC) to obtain L is of the
sort eﬀected by a character “ χL” which falls under Case III (relative to the terminology
of §4).
Thus, to summarize, the above discussion shows that it suﬃces to consider the evalu-
ation map given by evaluating sections ofL⊗ OC Fd(Ret
E†
C
) (over E∞ ,S)o n μd ⊆ (Gm)ˆS =
EˆS ↪→ E† ˆS (where EˆS ↪→ E† ˆS is the canonical section κ of Chapter III, Theorem 2.1).
Since this evaluation map is between vector bundles of rank d on S∞ , it follows that it
suﬃces to prove that it is injective modulo any prime p of O, at least after one inverts q.
But this injectivity follows immediately from Corollary 4.7 (applied in the case j
def
= d).
Indeed, to see this, we break up the evaluation map of sections of L⊗ OC Fd(Ret
E†
C
)o n
μd ⊆ Gm = EˆS ⊆ E† ˆS into two steps:
193

(1) First, we restrict sections of L⊗ OC Fd(Ret
E†
C
)t o EˆS =( Gm)ˆS ⊆ E† ˆS.
(2) Then, we strict functions on EˆS =( Gm)ˆS to μd ⊆ (Gm)ˆS = EˆS.
Strictly speaking, the linear independence assertion of Corollary 4.7 implies that the ﬁrst
restriction (1) is injective. (That is, if it were not, then there would be some A-linear
relation among ζχ
0 ,... ,ζχ
d−1 with at least one coeﬃcient which is nonzero modulo ( q, p).
Thus, in particular, we would get a linear relation modulo ( qn·cj′ , p) (with at least one
coeﬃcient which is nonzero modulo ( q, p)), but this contradicts Corollary 4.7.)
Thus, it remains to see that the second restriction (2) is injective. To see this, ﬁrst
observe that since we are in Case III, the number “|Cj′ |” (notation of Corollary 4.7) is equal
to j = d, i.e., “modulo qn·cj′ ” (notation of Corollary 4.7) the only χL-special monomials
that may occur (i.e., are nonzero) are OS-multiples of
“ UI+i·n”
(where U, n are as in Corollary 4.7; i =0 ,... ,d − 1; and I is some ﬁxed constant,
independent ofi) – cf. Schola 4.1. Moreover, “Un” (notation of§4) corresponds precisely to
the standard multiplicative coordinate onEˆS =( Gm)ˆS (notation of the present discussion).
Let us denote this standard coordinate by V . Thus, we see that the assertion that the
second restriction (2) is injective amounts to the following fact:
For any prime p of O, every polynomial in V of degree ≤ d − 1w h i c h
vanishes modulo p on μd ⊆ (Gm)ˆS = EˆS is identically 0 modulo p.
But this follows immediately from elementary algebraic geometry as follows: If we com-
pactify Gm by P1, then we see that we are reduced to verifying the assertion that every
global section over P1 of the line bundle
OP1 (−[μd]+( d − 1)[∞ ])
(where “[μd]” is the degreed divisor inGm ⊆ P1 deﬁned by μd,a n d“ [∞ ]” is the (degree 1)
divisor on P1 at “inﬁnity”) is identically zero (in every characteristic). But since this line
bundle has degree −1, this assertion is an immediate consequence of elementary algebraic
geometry.
This completes the proof of the various injectivity assertions mentioned above, and
hence of the entire alternate proof of Theorem 6.2. ⃝
Bibliography
[KM] N. Katz and B. Mazur, Arithmetic Moduli of Elliptic Curves, Annals of Mathematics
Studies 108, Princeton University Press (1985).
[Mumf1,2,3] D. Mumford, On the equations deﬁning abelian varieties I, II, III, Invent. Math. 1
(1966), pp. 287-354; 2 (1967), pp. 71-135; 3 (1967), pp. 215-244.
194

Chapter VI: The Scheme-Theoretic
Comparison Theorem
§0. Introduction
In this Chapter, we prove theScheme-Theoretic Comparison Isomorphism. This result
essentially asserts that:
There is a natural bijection between certain natural types of algebraic
functions on the universal extension of an elliptic curve and the “set-
theoretic functions” on the torsion points of the elliptic curve.
This natural bijection is given by restricting the algebraic functions on the universal exten-
sion to the torsion points of the universal extension. This restriction morphism is referred
to as the evaluation map (and is the main topic of Chapter V). Ultimately, the goal of this
paper is to show that the evaluation map is not only a bijection, say, in characteristic zero
(cf. Theorem 3.1), but that it preserves natural integral structures on both sides at all
the primes of the rational number ﬁeld. In the present Chapter, we address the scheme-
theoretic portion of this goal, namely, we show that we essentially get an isomorphism
schematically over (
M1,0)Z (cf. Theorem 4.1). In other words, we show that the integral
structures at all of the ﬁnite primes (essentially) coincide.
In §1, we deﬁne the algebraic functions on the universal extension that we are inter-
ested in. The sheaves of such functions are called the “{v,et}-push forwards” of a metrized
line bundle. In §2, we study the various basic properties of these push-forwards, with an
eye to proving (in §4) that they are compatible with base-change. In §3, we prove the
comparison isomorphism in characteristic zero, i.e., that the evaluation map is bijective in
characteristic zero (Theorem 3.1). Finally, in §4, we complete the proof of compatibility
with base-change, and show that the evaluation map also (essentially) preserves integral
structures on both sides at all ﬁnite primes (Theorem 4.1).
§1. Deﬁnition of a New Integral Structure at Inﬁnity
In this §, we prepare for the comparison isomorphism results in the remainder of this
Chapter by introducinga new integral structure in a neighborhood of the divisor at inﬁnity
(i.e., the locus on the base where the log elliptic curve in question degenerates). It will be
relative to this new integral structure that the evaluation map of Chapter V,§2, will turn
out to be an isomorphism.
195

In this §, we use the notations of Chapter V, §2. Let us ﬁrst recall the WE-torsor
E†
Cd,[d] → Cd
considered in Chapter V, §2. Note that since E†
Cd,[d] extends the torsor E†
[d] → E,w h i c h
is obtained from E† → E by “pushing out” with respect to multiplication by d on WE,i t
follows that the canonical splitting κ (of Chapter III, Theorem 2.1) of E† → E over EˆS
deﬁnes a canonical splitting
κ
E†
[d]
: EˆS → (E†
[d])ˆS
Note that since the ´etale-integral structure of Chapter V, Theorem 3.1, is deﬁned using
this canonical splitting (cf. Chapter V, §3; Chapter III, §6), it follows that κ
E†
[d]
deﬁnes,
for any integer i ≥ 0, a direct sum decomposition
Fi(Ret
(E†
[d])ˆS
) ∼=
i−1⨁
j=0
1
j! · τ⊗j
E |EˆS
(cf. Chapter V, Theorem 3.1). Similarly, one sees easily that by translation by d-torsion
points, we get analogous direct sum decompositions of Fi(Ret
(E†
Ed,[d])ˆS
)o v e rt h eq-adic
completions of Ed at the other d − 1 connected components of the special ﬁber of Ed.
Note, however, that these translated decompositions do not glue together at the nodes :
indeed, if they did, then we would obtain that κ
E†
[d]
extends over Cd, which is absurd (cf.
Chapter III, Theorem 5.6).
Now let us suppose that we are given a “valuation”
v ∈ Q≥0 · log(q)
(where Q≥0 is the set of nonnegative rational numbers, and “log(q)” is a formal symbol).
In the following, we will write
exp(v)
def
= qv/log(q)
We would like to construct, for each integeri ≥ 0, an S-ﬂat coherent sheaf
Fi(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v})
196

on Cd associated to v, as follows. First of all, over US = S − D,w eh a v e
Fi(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v})|US
def
= Fi(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
|US )
Next, let us deﬁne Fi(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v})o v e rEˆS by using the direct sum decomposition given
above in the following way: We giveFi(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v})|EˆS
the integral structure (relative to
this decomposition) deﬁned by:
Fi(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v})|EˆS
def
= OEˆS
⊕
( i−1⨁
j=1
1
j! · exp(−v) · τ⊗j
E |EˆS
)
We then deﬁne Fi(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v}) over the completions of Ed at the other d − 1 connected
components ofEd in a similar way, using thetranslated direct sum decompositionsdiscussed
above.
Now observe that we have deﬁned Fi(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v})o v e ra l lo fEd. Thus, it remains to
extend the resulting vector bundle over Ed over Cd (in some sort of natural fashion). But
this is just a matter of elementary commutative algebra, which we review in Lemma 1.1
below. In fact, Lemma 1.1 will also show that there is a unique extension of this vector
bundle on E
d over Cd which is S-ﬂat, coherent, and satisﬁes the property that any length
2 regular sequence of local sections of OCd is also regular on this extension. Relative to
the application of Lemma 1.1, we remark that:
(1) All of the notation used in Lemma 1.1 is strictly internal to Lemma
1.1 and has nothing to do with the notation in the remainder of the
discussion of this §.
(2) Of course, in general, Cd need not be regular, but it suﬃces to prove
extendability in the universal case (e.g., the “ EN → SN ” of Chapter
IV, §4, for “ N”t a k e nt ob ed), in which case Cd is regular, and the
nodes of Cd (with the reduced induced scheme structure) are regular of
dimension dim(Cd) − 2.
This completes the deﬁnition of the S-ﬂat coherent sheaf
Fi(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v})
on Cd.
197

Lemma 1.1. Let A be a regular local ring of dimension ≥ 2.L e t B
def
= A/(s, t) be a
quotient which is regular local ring of dimension dim(A) − 2.L e t F be a vector bundle
on U
def
=S p e c (A)\Spec(B) ⊆ X
def
=S p e c (B).T h e ni∗F is a coherent sheaf on X with
the property that any A-regular sequence of length 2 in A is also (i∗F)-regular. Thus, in
particular, if dim(A)=2 ,t h e ni∗F is a vector bundle on X.
Proof. It is well-known that in this situation, i∗F is a coherent sheaf (cf., e.g., [SGA2],
p. 97, Proposition 3.2). As for the assertions concerning depth, we reason as follows: Let
a, b ∈ A be regular on A.T h e nb acts injectively on any localization of A/(a). Thus, the
long exact sequence obtained by applying the derived functors of i∗ to
0 −→ F
a
−→ F −→ F /a ·F − → 0
shows that a acts injectively on i∗F, and that we have an inclusion ( i∗F)/a ↪→ i∗(F/a ·
F). On the other hand, F/a ·F is just a vector bundle over some open subscheme of
Spec(A/(a)), so multiplication by b is injective on F/a ·F , hence also on i∗(F/a ·F ), as
well as (i∗F)/a. This shows that a, b is regular on i∗F, as desired. If dim( A)=2 ,t h e n
this shows that i∗F has depth 2 as an A-module, hence (by the Auslander-Buchsbaum
formula – see, e.g., [Mats]) is a vector bundle. This completes the proof. ⃝
As remarked above, Fi(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v}) has a ﬁltration
0 ⊆ ... ⊆ Fj(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v}) ⊆ ... ⊆ Fi(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v})
(where 1 ≤ j ≤ i) whose subquotients admit natural inclusions
(Fj+1/Fj)(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v}) ⊆ 1
j! · exp(−v) · τ⊗j
E |Cd
Moreover, if v1 ≤ v2, then we have a natural inclusion
Fi(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v1}) ⊆ Fi(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v2})
We denote the union of all of these sheaves (asv ranges over all elements of Q≥0 · log(q))
by
Fi(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{∞} )
198

We summarize the properties of these sheaves as follows:
Proposition 1.2. The quasi-coherent sheaf of OCd -modules
Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v}
def
=
⋃
i≥0
Fi(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v})
comes equipped with an exhaustive ﬁltration
Fi(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v})
(for i ≥ 0) whose i-th member is an S-ﬂat coherent sheaf (of generic rank i)o n Cd.
Moreover, this quasi-coherent sheaf restricts (as a ﬁltered object) toRet
E†
Cd,[d]
(as in Chapter
V, Theorem 3.1) away from the divisor at inﬁnity. Finally, the natural morphisms
(Fi+1/Fi)(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v}) → 1
i! · exp(−v) ·O Cd ⊗OS τ⊗i
E
(if i ≥ 1)a n d
F1(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v}) →O Cd
arising from Chapter V, Theorem 3.1, areisomorphisms over Ed, i.e., away from the nodes
of Cd.
By pulling back these various objects from Cd to C∞ ,S and E∞ ,S, we obtain cor-
responding sheaves over C∞ ,S and E∞ ,S (cf. the construction of E†
C∞ ,S,[d], E†
∞ ,[d] =
E†
E∞ ,S,[d] → E∞ ,S in Chapter V, §2). Naturally, if we are given diﬀerent sequences vι at
the various connected components ιof the divisor at inﬁnity of S, then we may adjust the
integral structure according to the sequencevι at ι, and thus obtain global objects suﬃxed
by “ {v},” wherev
def
= {vι}ι. (We leave the formal details to the reader.)
In particular, if L is a metrized line bundle on E∞ ,S of relative degree d and whose
curvatures are d-invariant (i.e., a metrized line bundle of the sort considered in Chapter
V, §2), then by taking global sections over E∞ ,S of
199

L⊗ OE∞ ,S
Fi(Ret
E†
∞ ,[d]
{v})
(for i ≥ 0) we obtain a natural metrized vector bundle (of rank d · i)w i t hGL-action
(fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<i{v,et} ( ⊇ (fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<i )
on S∞ .
Deﬁnition 1.3. In the following, we shall refer to these push-forwards as {v,et}-push
forwards.
§2. Compatibility with Base-Change
In this §, we study the push-forwards deﬁned in §1 and show, in particular, that these
push-forwards are compatible with base-change if and only if they are compatible with
base-change “modulo p.” We will then show, in certain special cases, compatibility with
base-change modulo p in §4 below, and thus conclude (in §4) that (at least in these cases)
the various push-forwards deﬁned in §1 are compatible with base-change.
In this §, we continue to use the notation of§1. Let us suppose that we are also given
an m-torsion point
η ∈ E
∞ ,S(S∞ )
(where m ≥ 1 is an integer) as in Chapter V, §1. Then, by pulling back the metrized
line bundles constructed in the universal case in Chapter V, §1, we obtain metrized line
bundles
Lst,η; L
ev
st,η
on E∞ ,S. Let us take the metrized line bundle L (in the discussion at the end of §1) to be
Lst,η (respectively, L
ev
st,η)i f d is odd (respectively, even). Then, in this §, we would like to
study the {v,et}-push forwards
(fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<j {v,et}
200

(for j ≥ 1) on S∞ . In particular, we would like to study the extent to which these push-
forwards are compatible with base-change, among bases Slog as in §1 (=as in Chapter V,
§2), i.e., bases such that the pull-back of divisor at inﬁnity of (M1,0)Z is a Cartier divisor
on S and for which the q-parameter locally admits a d-th root.
First observe that over US
def
= S − D, compatibility with base-change follows imme-
diately from elementary algebraic geometry (cf., e.g., [Harts], Chapter III, Corollary 12.9,
Theorem 12.11), since: (i) the sheaf Ret admits a ﬁltration with subquotients which are
(locally on S) isomorphic to the structure sheaf (Proposition 1.2); (ii) the higher direct
image sheaves of the line bundle L|US with respect to the morphism E|US → US vanish.
Thus, it suﬃces to localize S to a neighborhood of an arbitrary point of D. In the follow-
ing discussion, we will often carry out such localizations without further justiﬁcation. In
particular, we may assume that “there is only one ι,” i.e., that D is irreducible.
Let us consider the line bundle
L. Without loss of generality, we assume in the case
of d even that the q-parameter has a 2 d-th root on S. (This may always be achieved
by replacing S by a ﬁnite, ﬂat covering of S; since this covering will be ﬂat, it will not
eﬀect compatibility with base-change issues.) If d is even, then we let β ∈ E∞ ,S(S)b ea
2d-torsion point as in Chapter IV, Lemma 5.4. Now, we let
M
be the metrized line bundleLst (respectively, T ∗
β L
ev
st )i f d is odd (respectively, even). (Here,
“ Tβ” is the automorphism of E∞ ,S given by translation by β.) Note that the curvature
of M is the same as that of L (cf. Chapter V, the discussion preceding Proposition 1.1,
for a computation of the curvature of L; Chapter IV, Lemma 5.4, for a computation of
the curvature of M). Moreover, it is clear from the deﬁnitions of L and M on E∞ ,S |US
(namely, both are obtained by translating a multiple of the divisor deﬁned by the identity
element by some torsion point) that there exists an integerN ≥ 1 such that (after possibly
localizing S further) we obtain an isomorphism of metrized line bundles:
L
⊗N ∼= M
⊗N
In particular, it follows that we may write
L = M⊗ Q
where Q is a metrized line bundle onE∞ ,S such that Q
⊗N
is trivial. Note, moreover, that
M is represented by a line bundle on Cd in the usual sense (cf. Chapter IV, Lemma 5.4).
The point here (cf. the proof of Chapter IV, Theorem 5.8) is that we would like to reduce
compatibility with base-change assertions concerning themetrized line bundle
L (which is
a delicate issue) to compatibility with base-change assertions for the “line bundle in the
usual sense M”(an issue which is well-known from elementary algebraic geometry).
201

Thus, M is a line bundle in the usual sense on Cd. Let us assume (without loss of
generality) that the q-parameter on ˆS admits an 2N ·d-th root. Then it follows that there
exists a ﬁnite isogeny E′
d → Ed (of degree N) whose kernel is isomorphic toμN .M o r e o v e r ,
this isogeny compactiﬁes to a diagram
E′
d ⊆ C′
d
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
Ed ⊆ Cd
The purpose of introducing E′
d is that the pull-back of the metrized line bundle Q to E′
∞ ,S
is a line bundle in the usual sense . Indeed, to see this, one reasons as follows: First of
all, observe (from the general theory of abelian schemes) that the kernel of the pull-back
morphism on Picard groups induced by the isogenyE
′
∞ ,S |US → E∞ ,S |US is the Cartier dual
of Ker(E′
∞ ,S |US → E∞ ,S |US )= μN . Thus, the kernel of the pull-back morphism is Z/NZ
(cf. the discussion in Chapter IV, §2, of the isogenies “ E[n] → E → ˜E” and line bundles
on ˜E which become trivial when pulled back to E[n]). In other words, if one thinks of the
subscheme of N-torsion points of E∞ ,S |US as μN × (Z/NZ), then this kernel is generated
by the line bundle corresponding to a divisor of the form τ − eE∞ ,S ,w h e r eeE∞ ,S is the
identity element ofE∞ ,S,a n dτis an N-torsion point whose projection toZ/NZ generates
Z/NZ. In particular, this means that the pull-back of Q|US to E′
∞ ,S |US is isomorphic to
the pull-back to E′
∞ ,S |US of the line bundle associated to a divisor of the form τ− eE∞ ,S ,
where τ ∈ μN (S) ⊆ E(S) ⊆ E∞ ,S(S). On the other hand, note that for such a τ,t h e
line bundle (in the usual sense) OCd (τ − eCd ) already forms a metrized line bundle on
E∞ ,S whose curvature is zero. Thus, in summary, Q|E′
∞ ,S
and OCd (τ − eCd )|E′
∞ ,S
have
isomorphic restrictions toE′
∞ ,S |US and, moreover, both have curvature zero. In particular,
by Chapter IV, Proposition 4.3, it follows that these two metrized line bundles on E′
∞ ,S
are isomorphic, i.e., that the metrized line bundle Q|E′
∞ ,S
is represented by a line bundle
in the usual sense on C′
d, as desired.
Thus, to summarize, we have L = M⊗ Q,w h e r eM arises from a line bundle in
the usual sense on Cd;a n dQ|E′
∞ ,S
arises from a line bundle in the usual sense on C′
d.I n
particular, we conclude that:
The metrized line bundleL|E′
∞ ,S
arises from a line bundleP in the usual
sense on C′
d. Moreover, the restriction of P to each to the irreducible
components of the special ﬁber of C′
d is of degree N (since E′
d → Ed is
of degree N).
Now ﬁx an integer j ≥ 1, and let
F
def
= Fj(Ret
E†
Cd,[d]
{v})|C′
d
202

Thus, F is an S-ﬂat coherent sheaf on C′
d whose restriction to E′
d is a vector bundle of
rank j which admits a ﬁltration whose subquotients are isomorphic to OE′
d
. Moreover, the
push-forwards
(fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<j {v,et}
that we are interested in are simply the μN -invariant portions of
f ′
∗(F⊗ OC′
d
P)
(where, in the following, we shall write f ′
∗ for the push-forwards to S of objects on C′
d or
E′
d) with respect to the evident natural μN -action. Thus, since the group scheme μN is
of multiplicative type, hencereductive (so the operation of “taking the μN -invariant part”
commutes with base-change), it follows that:
The issue of the compatibility of the push-forward
(fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<j {v,et}
with base-change may be reduced to the issue of the compatibility of the
push-forward f ′
∗(F⊗ OC′
d
P)= f ′
∗{(F⊗ OC′
d
P)|E′
d
} with base-change.
At this point, before we continue to study compatibility with base-change issues further,
we pause to note the following important lemma:
Lemma 2.1. The metrized vector bundle
(fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<j {v,et}
(which a priori – cf. Chapter IV, Deﬁnition 5.2 – is just a quasi-coherent sheaf on S∞ )
is, in fact, a coherent sheaf on S∞ . If, moreover, the classifying morphism S → (M1,0)Z
is ﬂat , then this coherent sheaf is, in fact, a vector bundle on S∞ .
Proof. Indeed, the above discussion shows that this metrized vector bundle is just the
μN -invariant portion of the push-forward
f ′
∗(F⊗ OC′
d
P)
203

On the other hand, this latter push-forward is clearly a coherent sheaf of OS∞ -modules.
Thus, the metrized vector bundle ( fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<j {v,et} is, in fact, a coherent sheaf of
OS∞ -modules, as desired.
If the classifying morphism is ﬂat, then formation of push-forwards is compatible with
base-change, so we reduce immediately to the “universal case” – i.e., where S is, say, of
the form Spec( O[[q
1
2N ·d ]]), and O is the Zariski localization of the ring of integers of a
number ﬁeld. In this case, S∞ is a projective limit of regular schemes of dimension 2, so
we conclude from from Lemma 1.1 that “any metrized vector bundle on S∞ which is a
coherent sheaf of OS∞ -modules is, in fact, a vector bundle on S∞ ,” as desired. ⃝
Next, we consider base-change issues. The following result follows from elementary
homological algebra:
Lemma 2.2. Let A be a quasi-coherent OS-algebra. Then we have an exact sequence:
f ′
∗{(F⊗ OC′
d
P)|E′
d
}⊗ OS A→ f ′
∗{(F⊗ OC′
d
P)|E′
d
⊗OS A}
→ Tor OS
1 (R1f ′
∗{(F⊗ OC′
d
P)|E′
d
}, A) → 0
Moreover, when j =1 , i.e., F = OC′
d
, we have R1f ′
∗(F⊗ OC′
d
P)=0 ,a n df ′
∗(F⊗ OC′
d
P) ⊗OS A = f ′
∗(F⊗ OC′
d
P⊗ OS A).
Proof. Indeed, the exact sequence follows by considering the usual spectral sequence
relating H∗(C·) ⊗OS A and H∗(C· ⊗OS A), where C· is a complex of ﬂat, coherent OS-
modules. In this case, since the push-forward functorf ′
∗ has cohomological dimension ≤ 1,
the complex C· may, in fact, be taken to consist of just two terms, i.e., C· may be written
C0 →C 1. The case j = 1 follows by considering the fact that P is a line bundle whose
restriction to each of the irreducible components of the special ﬁber of C′
d is of degree
N ≥ 1, and applying [Harts], Chapter III, Corollary 12.9, Theorem 12.11. ⃝
Now let us suppose that S is the spectrum of a regular local ring of dimension 2.
Suppose that α,β are a system of regular parameters for this regular local ring, and that
V (β) ⊆ S is set-theoretically equal to the divisor at inﬁnity D ⊆ S. Suppose, moreover,
that we know that the morphism
f ′
∗{(F⊗ OC′
d
P)|E′
d
}⊗ OS A→ f ′
∗{(F⊗ OC′
d
P)|E′
d
⊗OS A}
is surjective when A is taken to beOS/(α). Then I claim that it follows that this morphism
is surjective for all A on which β acts injectively. Indeed, our assumption concerning the
case when A = OS/(α) implies that
204

Tor OS
1 (R1f ′
∗{(F⊗ OC′
d
P)|E′
d
}, OS/(α)) = 0
i.e., that α acts injectively on the coherent sheaf B
def
= R1f ′
∗{(F⊗ OC′
d
P)|E′
d
}. Note that
although B itself might not be ﬁnitely generated overOS, it may be written as a direct limit
of ﬁnitely generated OS-submodules B′ ⊆B . Note that since α acts injectively on B,i t
also acts injectively on B′. Similarly, since B is set-theoretically supported on D, it follows
that B′ is also set-theoretically supported on D. But this implies that the OS-module B′
has depth ≥ 1, hence (by the “Auslander-Buchsbaum Formula” – cf., e.g., [Mats]) that the
OS-module B has cohomological dimension ≤ 1. Since, moreover, B′ is (set-theoretically)
supported on D, we thus conclude that there exists an exact sequence
0 −→ O r
S
φ
−→ O r
S −→ B ′ −→ 0
(where r is an integer). Moreover, since the zero locus of det( φ) ∈O S is set-theoretically
equal to D, we conclude that there exists an OS-linear morphism ψ : Or
S →O r
S such
that ψ ◦φ = βa, for some integer a ≥ 0. In particular, we conclude that the above exact
sequence remains exact after tensoring with any A on which β acts injectively. But this
implies that for such an A,w eh a v eTor OS
1 (B′, A) = 0, hence (since Tor commutes with
ﬁltered direct limits) that Tor OS
1 (B, A) = 0, as claimed.
In fact, in our situation, instead of being given that the entire morphism
f ′
∗{(F⊗ OC′
d
P)|E′
d
}⊗ OS A→ f ′
∗{(F⊗ OC′
d
P)|E′
d
⊗OS A}
is surjective when A = O/(α), we will instead just be given that its μN-invariant portion
is surjective when A = O/(α). But since μN is of multiplicative type, it is clear that the
argument of the preceding paragraph then allows one to conclude the surjectivity of the
μ
N -invariant portion of this morphism for any A on which β acts injectively. In other
words, we have proven the following:
Lemma 2.3. Suppose that S is the spectrum of a regular local ring of dimension 2 .
Suppose that α,β are a system of regular parameters for this regular local ring, and that
V (β) ⊆ S is set-theoretically equal to the divisor at inﬁnity D ⊆ S. Suppose, moreover,
that we know that the morphism
f ′
∗{(F⊗ OC′
d
P)|E′
d
}⊗ OS A→ f ′
∗{(F⊗ OC′
d
P)|E′
d
⊗OS A}
is surjective on μN-invariant parts when A is taken to be OS/(α). Then it follows that
this morphism is surjective on μN-invariant parts for all A on which β acts injectively.
205

§3. The Comparison Isomorphism in Characteristic Zero
The purpose of the present § is to show that for appropriate choices of the metrized
line bundle L (cf. Chapter V, §1), certain slightly modiﬁed versions of the evaluation maps
of Chapter V, Propositions 2.2, 2.3, are isomorphisms in characteristic zero.
In this §, we use the notation of§1. Let us suppose that we are also given anm-torsion
point
η ∈ E∞ ,S(S∞ )
(where m ≥ 1 is an integer) as in Chapter V, §1. Then, by pulling back the metrized
line bundles constructed in the universal case in Chapter V, §1, we obtain metrized line
bundles
Lst,η; L
ev
st,η
on E∞ ,S. We are now ready to state and prove the following result:
Theorem 3.1. (Comparison Isomorphism in Characteristic Zero) Let d, m ≥ 1 be
integers such that m does not divide d. Suppose that Slog is a ﬁne noetherian log scheme,
and let
Clog → Slog
be a log elliptic curve over Slog such that the “divisor at inﬁnity” D ⊆ S (i.e., the pull-
back of the divisor at inﬁnity of (M1,0)Z via the classifying morphism S → (M1,0)Z)i sa
Cartier divisor on S. Also, let us assume that ´etale locally on the completion of S along
D, the pull-back of the Tate parameter q to this completion admits a d-th root, and that
the classifying morphism S → (M1,0)Z associated to Clog → Slog is ﬂat in a neighborhood
of D. (Note that this ﬂatness automatically holds whenever S is of characteristic zero.)
Suppose, moreover, we are given atorsion point
η ∈ E∞ ,S(S∞ )
of order precisely m which (according to the discussion preceding Chapter V, Proposition
1.1) deﬁnes line bundles Lst,η, L
ev
st,η.I f d is odd (respectively, even), then let L
def
= Lst,η
(respectively, L
def
= L
ev
st,η). Then:
(1) For any collection v = {vι}ι of elements of Q≥0 · log(q) ⋃ ∞ (one for
each connected component ιof the divisor at inﬁnity D), the evalua-
tion map of Chapter V, Proposition 2.2 (for “α” taken to be0) factors
206

through the metrized vector bundle (fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{v,et} of §1 to de-
ﬁne a natural morphism
Ξ{v,et} :( fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{v,et}→ (fS)∗(L|
(dE†
∞ )
)
(2) If vι = ∞ for all ι,t h e n
Ξ{v,et}⊗ Q
is an isomorphism. Moreover, at each ι, there exists a unique sequence
aι = {(aι)0,... ,(aι)d−1} of elements ofQ≥0 ·log(q) such that the natural
inclusions
Fj((fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{(aι)j−1,et}) ⊆ Fj((fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{∞ ,et})
are all equalities and the natural projections
(Fj/Fj−1)((fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{(aι)j−1,et}) −→
1
(j − 1)! · exp(−(aι)j−1) · (fS)∗(L|E∞ ,S ) ⊗OS τ⊗j−1
E
(where j =1 ,... ,d)a r esurjective (hence bijective).
(3) Finally, these sequences aι satisfy the following condition: for each
connected componentι, there is an Xι ∈{ I,II,III } such that
(aι)j−1 = 1
d · cj
where cj is as in Chapter V, §4, for Case Xι.
Proof. First, let us observe that since the classifying morphism S → (M1,0)Z is ﬂat in
a neighborhood of inﬁnity, the various push-forwards (fS)∗ (along with their ﬁltrations)
207

are compatible with base-change (cf. Lemma 2.2). (Note that in characteristic zero, the
classifying morphism factors through ( M1,0)Q, which is regular of dimension one. Thus,
ﬂatness follows from the assumption that the q-parameter is a non-zero divisor, i.e., that
the closed subscheme D is a Cartier divisor on S.) Thus, it suﬃces to prove Theorem
3.1 in the “universal case” – for instance, in the case of S
def
= T,w h e r eT → B is any
“nice covering,” as in Chapter V, Proposition 1.2, such that at each ι, the corresponding
q-parameter has a d-th root in OT .
Next, note that to see that the evaluation map of Chapter V, Proposition 2.2, factors
as claimed in (1), it suﬃces to prove that it factors in characteristic zero. Indeed, once it
factors in characteristic zero, the fact that it also factors away from the divisor at inﬁnity
(cf. Proposition 1.2; the integrality statement at the end of Chapter V, Theorem 3.1)
implies – since S = T is ﬁnite, ﬂat over (
M1,0)Z, which is regular – that it factors over
all of S = T. Similarly, the natural inclusions of (2) are equalities if and only if they are
equalities in characteristic zero. Indeed, if they are equalities in characteristic zero, then
both sides are vector bundles (cf. Lemma 2.1) which are tautologically equal away from
the divisor at inﬁnity.
Thus, in summary, except for the surjectivity of the natural projections in (2), it
suﬃces to prove Theorem 3.1 in characteristic zero. In particular, for the remainder of the
proof (except where speciﬁed otherwise),
We assume that S is T ⊗ Q,w h e r eT is as above.
Also, to simplify the discussion, we assume that S is connected. Thus, the base S is a
smooth, proper curve over a ﬁeld of characteristic zero.
Now we divide the proof into parts:
Local Assertions:
Let us ﬁrst show that the evaluation map factors as stated in (1) for any choice of v,
and that the natural projections of (2)
(Fj/Fj−1)((fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{(aι)j−1,et}) −→
1
(j − 1)! · exp(−(aι)j−1) · (fS)∗(L|E∞ ,S ) ⊗OS τ⊗j−1
E
are surjective for the special choice of v referred in (2) and (3).
Since these are local issues at inﬁnity , we assume (just for this “Local Assertions”
part of the proof) that
S =S p e c (A)
208

where A = O[[q
1
N ·d ]] (where N
def
=2 m · d), and O is a Zariski localization of the ring of
integers of a number ﬁeld. Let KH = Z/dZ ⊆ dE be the subgroup corresponding to the
d-th root q
1
d of q. Thus, we have a ﬁnite ´etale isogeny
Ed → Ed/KH = EH
One checks easily (using Chapter IV, Lemma 5.4 – cf. the argument in the “Alternate
Proof of Theorem 6.2” in Chapter V,§6) that L descends to a metrized line bundle LH of
relative degree 1 on E∞ H ,S. Thus, there exists a Lagrangian subgroup (cf. the discussion
of such subgroups in Chapter IV, §1)
H ⊆G L
Note that the {v,et}-push forwards, as well as the evaluation maps Ξ{v,et} all have “sub-
script H versions” (obtained by taking “ H-invariants” of the original versions discussed
above). We leave the routine details to the reader.
Next, let us note that dE†
∞ H ⊆ E†
∞ H ,[d] lies inside the canonical section derived from
κ. Indeed, this follows from the facts that:
(i) the canonical section is a group homomorphism (Chapter III, Theo-
rem 2.1);
(ii) WE has no torsion since our base S is Z-ﬂat; and
(iii) the image of dE†
∞ H in E∞ H ,S lies in the identity component of the
special ﬁber of E∞ H,S.
Since the modiﬁcations in integral structure that one performs in order to construct the
{v,et}-push-forward (for any v) are all done using the splittings deﬁned by the canonical
section (derived fromκ), it is atautology that all sections of the{v,et}-push-forward which
have “denominators” relative to the usual push-forward vanish (i.e., modulo the sections
which do not have denominators relative to the usual push-forward) when restricted to
the canonical section, hence when restricted todE†
∞ H . Thus, it follows that the evaluation
map of Chapter V, Proposition 2.2, factors as claimed in (1) (for any v).
Next, let us observe that “metrically speaking” LH is the same as the metrized line
bundle OE∞ H,S ([eE∞ H ,S ]). More precisely, we have:
L
⊗m·d
H ∼= OE∞ H ,S (m · d · [eE∞ H ,S ])
Indeed, if we forget about metrics, this follows from the linear equivalence m(d · [η]) ∼
m · d · [e]o n E∞ ,S |US pushed forward from E∞ ,S to E∞ H ,S. Moreover, it follows from the
209

computation of the curvature of L (in the discussion preceding Chapter V, Proposition
1.1) that both sides have the same curvature. Thus, by Chapter IV, Proposition 4.3, it
follows that these two metrized line bundles are isomorphic. (Indeed, it is easy to check
that the constant “ C” in Chapter IV, Proposition 4.3, may be taken to be zero in this
case).
In particular, it follows that
LH diﬀers from OE∞ H,S ([eE∞ H ,S ]) by a metrized line
bundle on E∞ H ,S whose (m · d)-th power is trivial. But, in the language of Chapter V, §4,
if we think of EH here as the curve “ ˜E” of Chapter V, §4, then this amounts to saying
that LH is the same as the “standard line bundle ˜L˜E” of Chapter V, §4, twisted by some
appropriate character χL of order “ n” where we take the “ n” of Chapter V, §4, to be
N =2 m · d, relative to the notation used here. This character χL falls into one of the
three “Cases” treated in Chapter V, §4. We take Xι ∈{ I,II,III } to be the “Case” that
χL falls under (cf. Chapter V, Theorem 4.6).
Now let
(aι)j−1
def
= 1
d · cj · log(q)
(where cj is as in Chapter V, §4), and apply Chapter V, Theorem 4.6. Note that the “ q”
of Chapter V, §4, which we write qCh. V,§4, is such that qN
Ch. V,§4 is the q-invariant of ˜E,
which corresponds to EH in the present discussion. Since the q-invariant qEH of EH is
equal to q
1
d , we thus see that
q
1
d = qEH = qN
Ch. V,§4
Thus, the various adjustments of integral structure used to form the {v,et}-push-forward
are of the form
exp((aι)j−1)= q
1
d ·cj = qcj
EH = qN ·cj
Ch. V,§4
Note, moreover, that
cj =M a xj0 ≤j(cj0 )
(where j0 ranges over all integers ≤ j which are admissible as “ j0’s” for Chapter V,
Theorem 4.6, and we deﬁne the “Max” of the empty set to be 0). Note that Chapter
V, Theorem 4.6, addresses the case of “torsorial degree” (cf. Chapter III, Deﬁnition 2.2)
<j and states that in this case, there exist generators of the portion of the “usual” push-
forward (i.e., without the {v
ι}) corresponding to torsorial degrees j0 − 1,... ,j − 1w h i c h
vanish modulo exp((aι)j0 −1)= q
1
d ·cj when restricted to the canonical section derived from
κ over (EH)ˆS.M o r e o v e r ,i fj0 is the largest “admissible j0” (for Chapter V, Theorem 4.6)
210

which is ≤ j,t h e ne x p ( (aι)j′ )=e x p ( (aι)j0 −1), for all j′ ∈{ j0 − 1,... ,j − 1}.T h u s , i f
we divide these generators by exp((aι)j0 −1), we see that we get integral sections of the
(aι)j−1-push-forward. In particular, we see that for this choice of ( aι)j−1, the natural
projections
(Fj/Fj−1)((fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{(aι)j−1,et}) −→
1
(j − 1)! · exp(−(aι)j−1) · (fS)∗(L|E∞ ,S ) ⊗OS τ⊗j−1
E
are surjective, as desired. This completes the proof of the local assertions.
Reduction to the Computation of Degrees:
Let us now return to our global, universal, characteristic zero S.
Next, let us observe that, by Chapter V, Theorems 5.6 and 6.2, it follows from the
fact that m does not divide d (so d · η ̸= 0) that in the present universal situation, the
evaluation map of Chapter V, Proposition 2.2, is an isomorphism over the generic point
of S. Thus, now that we have shown that the evaluation map factors as stated, to show
that Ξ{v,et} is an isomorphism over all of S, it will suﬃce to compute the degrees of the
metrized vector bundles (of rank d
2) on both sides, and show that:
deg(domain) ≥ deg(range)
Note, moreover, that:
The surjectivity assertion of (2) (proven above) is necessary in order to
bound from below the degree of the{v,et}-push-forward (for v = ∞ ) by
the sum of the degrees of the variousexp(−(aι)j−1) ·(fS)∗(L|E∞ ,S ) ⊗OS
τ⊗j−1
E .
It turns out that the computation of the degree diﬀers quite substantially, depending on
whether d is odd or even. Thus, in the following we carry out the computations in these
two cases separately.
Computation of the Degree in the Odd Case:
To complete the proof of Theorem 3.1 for d odd, it suﬃces (as noted above) to show
that in the situation discussed above, the degree of the domain of Ξ{v,et} is ≥ the degree
of the range. Let us ﬁrst observe that Chapter V, Proposition 1.2, implies that:
The degree of the range ofΞ{v,et} is equal to 0.
211

Thus, it remains to show that the degree of the {v,et}-push-forward (for v = ∞ )i s ≥ 0.
First, let us note that the surjectivity assertion already proven implies that:
deg(v−push − forward) − deg(usual push − forward) ≥ d ·
∑
ι
d−1∑
j=0
(aι)j
=
∑
ι
d∑
j=1
cj(Case Xι)
= 1
24d(d2 − 1)
(in log(q) units), where:
(1) In the ﬁrst inequality, the extra factor of d out in front arises from the
fact that the push-forward of the metrized line bundle L on E∞ ,S has
rank d.
(2) In the last equality, we apply Chapter V, Lemma 4.2.
On the other hand, the usual push-forward admits a ﬁltration (by torsorial degree) whose
subquotients are τ⊗j
E ⊗OS (fS)∗(L|E∞ ,S ), for j =0 ,... ,d − 1. Since the line bundle τE on
S has degree (in log(q) units) given by − 1
12 (cf. the proof of Chapter IV, Theorem 5.8),
we thus obtain that the degree of the usual push-forward is given by:
− d
12 · (
d−1∑
j=0
j)+ d · deg((fS)∗(L|E∞ ,S )) = − 1
24d(d2 − 1)
(cf. the Remark following Chapter V, Proposition 1.1). Thus, putting everything together,
we obtain that the {v,et}-push-forward has degree ≥ 0, as desired.
This completes the proof of the fact that Ξ {v,et} is an isomorphism for v = ∞ .I t
also shows that the natural inclusions of (2)
Fj((fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{(aι)j−1}) ⊆ Fj((fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{∞} )
are all equalities (for if any one of them were not an inequality, it would follow that the
degree of the domain of Ξ{∞} is > the degree of the range, which is absurd). (Note that
here we use the fact that the function j ↦→ (aι)j is “monotone increasing” (i.e., preserves
the relation “ ≤”).) This completes the proof of Theorem 3.1, for d odd.
212

Computation of the Degree in the Even Case:
In the even case, the computations become somewhat more complicated. First, let us
note that by Chapter V, Proposition 1.2, we have:
deg(range) = −d
∑
ι
φ1(−d · ηι+ 1
2)
= −d
∑
ι
{φ1(−d · ηι+ 1
2) − φ1(−d · ηι)}
where we note that:
(1) The intersection number of Chapter V, Proposition 1.2, must be mul-
tiplied by d2,s i n c ew eh a v ed2 torsion points annihilated by d.
(2) In the second line, the sum over all ιof the second term is zero,s i n c e
m does not divide d – cf. the (proof of the) odd part of Chapter V,
Proposition 1.2.
Next, observe that for |θ|≤ 1
2 , the function θ ↦→ φ1(θ+ 1
2 ) − φ1(θ) is linear, except at
0a n d 1
2 (cf. Chapter IV, Corollary 4.5), and takes the value − 1
8 (respectively, 1
8 )a t
θ= 0 (respectively, θ= 1
2 ) – cf. Chapter IV, Proposition 4.4. It is easy to see that these
properties determine this function uniquely, namely:
φ1(θ+ 1
2) − φ1(θ)= 1
2 |θ|− 1
8
for |θ|≤ 1
2 .
On the other hand, we have
deg(domain) ≥− 1
24d(d2 − 1) +
∑
ι
d∑
j=1
cj(Case Xι)
= − 1
24d(d2 − 1) +
∑
ι
d−1∑
j=1
cj(Case Xι)+
∑
ι
cd(Case Xι)
= − 1
24d(d2 − 1) + 1
24(d − 1)((d − 1)2 − 1) +
∑
ι
cd(Case Xι)
= 1
24d(d − 1){−(d +1 )+ d − 2} +
∑
ι
cd(Case Xι)
= − 1
8d(d − 1) +
∑
ι
cd(Case Xι)
213

where:
(1) The ﬁrst line follows by the same general reasoning as in the odd case.
(2) The third line follows from the computation of the sum of the cj’s in
the odd case, applied to the odd number d − 1.
Thus, to summarize, we would like to prove that
− 1
2k(k − 1
2)+
∑
ι
c2k(Case Xι) ≥− d
∑
ι
{φ1(−d · ηι+ 1
2) − φ1(−d · ηι)}
where we set k
def
= d
2 .
Now, for each ι, we would like to deﬁne a number iι, as follows. If Xι = I (i.e., we
are in Case I at ι), then let
iι
def
= m · d = mCh. V,§4
(i.e., “ m · d” in the notation of the present discussion corresponds to “m” in the notation
of Chapter V, §4( = mCh. V,§4) – cf. the discussion of the “Local Assertions” part of the
proof). If Xι = II,t h e nl e t
iι
def
=0
If Xι = III ,t h e nl e t
iι
def
= |iχ |
(where |iχ | <m Ch. V,§4 is as in the discussion of Case III in Chapter V, §4). Then let us
observe that it follows immediately from the explicit formulas for cd(Case Xι) in Chapter
V, §4, that we have
cd(Case Xι)= 1
2k2 − 1
2k · iι
mCh. V,§4
= 1
2k(k − iι
mCh. V,§4
)
(where we use here the fact that d =2 k is even). Thus, we see that the left-hand side of
the inequality that we would like to show may be written as follows:
− 1
2k(k− 1
2)+
∑
ι
1
2k(k− iι
mCh. V,§4
)=
∑
ι
1
2k(1
2 − iι
mCh. V,§4
)= −
∑
ι
1
8d(2 iι
mCh. V,§4
−1)
214

(where we note that in our conventions, the “sums” overιare “to be in log(q) units,” hence
amount, in fact, to averages; thus, a sum overιof a constant C is equal to the constant C
itself). Thus, by dividing by −d, we see that it suﬃces to show that
∑
ι
1
8( 2iι
mCh. V,§4
− 1) =
∑
ι
(1
2 |θι|− 1
8)
where θι is the unique rational number of absolute value≤ 1
2 that deﬁnes the same element
as −d · ηι in S1
ι. In particular, it suﬃces to verify that
1
2
iι
mCh. V,§4
= |θι|
for each ι. But if one unravels the deﬁnitions, it is easy to see that this is essentially
a tautology: Indeed, it follows from the even part of Chapter IV, Lemma 5.4, that the
character χL of Chapter V, §4, is precisely that determined by the torsion point−d ·ηι+ 1
2
of S1
ι, i.e.,
χL ←→ − d · ηι+ 1
2
On the other hand, it follows from the deﬁnitions of Chapter V, §4, that ± iι
2m
Ch. V,§4
is
precisely the “coordinate” on S1
ι corresponding to the character χM, i.e.,
χM ←→ ± iι
2mCh. V,§4
Moreover, the character χM is the result of shifting the character χL by the character
deﬁned by 1
2 :
χM ⊗ χL
−1 ←→ 1
2
Thus, putting everything together, the two “ 1
2 ’s” cancel, and we see that the rational
number iι
2m
Ch. V,§4
(≤ 1
2 ) deﬁnes the same element (up to sign) as −d · ηι in S1
ι, hence is
equal to |θι|, as desired.
This completes the proof of the fact that Ξ[∞ ] is an isomorphism in the case ofd even.
The fact that the natural inclusions of Theorem 3.1, (2), are, in fact, equalities follows by
the same argument as in the odd case. Thus, the proof of Theorem 3.1 is complete. ⃝
Remark. One may regard the computation of the sequencesa
ιin Theorem 3.1, (2), (3), such
that the natural inclusions and natural projections of (2) are surjective as a computation
215

of the analytic torsion of the {v,et}-push forwards (i.e., the push-forwards equipped with
the new integral structure/metric deﬁned at the beginning of this §). This point of view is
very much in line with what we will do in Chapter VII, Chapter VIII, where we compute
analogous analytic torsion-type quantities at the archimedean primes of a number ﬁeld.
§4. The Comparison Isomorphism in Mixed Characteristic
In this §,w ep r o v et h eComparison Isomorphism in Mixed Characteristic. Put another
way, we show in this § that the characteristic zero isomorphism of §3, Theorem 3.1, (2),
preserves certain natural integral structures (at all ﬁnite primes) on both sides.
In this §, we shall continue to use the notations of§3. The following result is themain
result of this Chapter:
Theorem 4.1. (Comparison Isomorphism in Mixed Characteristic) Let d, m ≥ 1
be integers such thatm does not divide d. Suppose that Slog is a ﬁne noetherian log scheme,
and let
Clog → Slog
be a log elliptic curve over Slog such that the “divisor at inﬁnity” D ⊆ S (i.e., the pull-
back of the divisor at inﬁnity of (M1,0)Z via the classifying morphism S → (M1,0)Z)i sa
Cartier divisor on S. Also, let us assume that ´etale locally on the completion of S along
D, the pull-back of the Tate parameter q to this completion admits a d-th root, and that
we are given a torsion point
η ∈ E∞ ,S(S∞ )
of order precisely m which deﬁnes line bundles Lst,η, L
ev
st,η (cf. Chapter V, §1). If d is odd
(respectively, even), then let L
def
= Lst,η (respectively, L
def
= L
ev
st,η). Then:
(1) (Compatibility with Base-Change) For any collection v = {vι}ι
of elements of Q≥0 · log(q) ⋃ ∞ (one for each connected componentιof
the divisor at inﬁnity D) such that for each ι, vι ≥ (aι)d−1 (notation of
Theorem 3.1, (3)), the formation of the push-forward
(fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{v,et}
216

(along with its ﬁltration) commutes with base-change(among bases Slog
satisfying the hypotheses given above).
(2) (Zero Locus of the Determinant) Assume that S is Z-ﬂat .I f
vι = ∞ for all ι, then the scheme-theoretic zero locus of det(Ξ{v,et}),
i.e., the determinant of the morphism
Ξ{v,et} :( fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{v,et}→ (fS)∗(L|
(dE†
∞ )
)
of Theorem 3.1, (1), is given by the divisor
d · [η
⋂
(dE)]
(where dE is the kernel of multiplication byd on Ed). In fact, the divisor
of poles of the inverse morphism to Ξ{v,et} is contained in the divisor
[η ⋂ (dE)].
(3) (Analytic Torsion Properties) For each ι, let us write
aι = {(aι)0,... ,(aι)d−1}
for the sequence of elements of Q≥0 · log(q) discussed in Theorem 3.1,
(2), (3). Then the natural inclusions
Fj+1((fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{(aι)j,et}) ⊆ Fj+1((fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{∞ ,et})
are all equalities and the natural projections
(Fj+1/Fj)((fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{(aι)j,et}) −→ 1
j! · exp(−(aι)j) · (fS)∗(L|E∞ ,S ) ⊗OS τ⊗j
E
(where j =0 ,... ,d − 1)a r ebijective. Moreover, the sections of L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
that realize these bijections have q-expansions in a neighborhood of in-
ﬁnity that are given explicitly in Chapter V, Theorem 4.8.
217

Remark. Relative to the bound on the poles of the inverse morphism to Ξ {v,et} (i.e.,
Theorem 4.1, (2)), we remark that these denominators tend to be very small . Indeed,
typically an intersection between torsion points will look like the zero locus of some 1− ω,
where ω is a root of unity. In fact, by taking m to have at least two prime factors that do
not divide d, it is easy to see that one can arrange that η ⋂ (dE)= ∅.
Remark. Note that compatibility with base-change is extremely important for applications.
For instance, base-change from (M1,0)Z to a point of (M1,0)Z valued in the ring of integers
of a number ﬁeld is a typical case of a situation where one must use the “full power” of
compatibility with base-change.
Remark. The poles “exp(−(a
ι)j)” appearing in Theorem 4.1, (3), are clearly of fundamen-
tal importance in Theorems 3.1 and 4.1, and indeed, of fundamental importance to this
entire paper. We shall refer to these poles as Gaussian poles, since they grow roughly like
a Gaussian (i.e., (a
ι)j is roughly quadratic in j).
Proof. First, let us observe that once one proves the base-change assertion (1), assertions
(2) and (3) will follow as soon as they have been proven in the “universal case” – i.e., say,
for S regular of dimension 2 such that the classifying morphism S → (
M1,0)Z is ﬂat. But
in this “universal case,” assertion (3) already follows from Theorem 3.1, (2). Also, in the
“universal case,” assertion (2) follows from Theorem 3.1, (2), and Chapter V, Theorem
6.2. Indeed, both the domain and range of Ξ {v,et} are vector bundles of the same rank
over a two-dimensional regular base (cf. Lemma 2.1), so the scheme-theoretic zero locus
of the determinant of Ξ{v,et} is known as soon as it is known at the height 1 primes. But
at the height 1 primes, the zero locus of det(Ξ{v,et}) is known by Theorem 3.1, (2), and
Chapter V, Theorem 6.2. Thus, in summary, to complete the proof of Theorem 4.1, it
suﬃces to prove assertion (1) under the hypothesis that assertions (2) and (3) are known
in the “universal case.”
On the other hand, by what we did in §2, we know that assertion (1) holds away
from the divisor at inﬁnity . Thus, by Lemma 2.3, it suﬃces to prove compatibility with
base-change in the special case where S is regular of dimension 2, and the classifying
morphism S → (
M1,0)Z is ﬁnite and ﬂat (cf. the theory of [KM], Chapter 5). Let O be
the normalization of Z in S. Then we may even assume that the ﬁbers of S → Spec(O)
are geometrically reduced, and evensmooth near inﬁnity. Indeed, by ﬂatness over (M1,0)Z,
it suﬃces to check this near inﬁnity, where S may be taken to be such that its completion
at inﬁnity is the spectrum of
O[[q
1
M ]]
for some positive integer M. In fact, Lemma 2.3 tells us that it suﬃces to prove compati-
bility with base-change for the particular base-change
218

S ×O Spec(O/p) → S
where p is an arbitrary maximal prime of O. In the following, we will denote the result of
base-changing objects via O→ k
def
= O/p by means of a subscript k.
Next, let us observe that the morphism “f ′
∗(F⊗ OC′
d
P)⊗OS A→ f ′
∗(F⊗ OC′
d
P⊗ OS A)”
studied in §2i sa l w a y sinjective. Indeed, this follows from the fact that both sides inject
into their restrictions to US = S\D, where they are equal. Thus, compatibility with base-
change issues amount to thesurjectivity of the “ μN -invariant part of” (terminology of§2)
this morphism.
Thus, in summary, it suﬃces to show that the morphism
(fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<j {v,et}⊗ O k → (fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
⊗O k)<j {v,et}
is surjective for all j =1 ,... ,d.L e t u s w r i t eRj (respectively, Dj; Ij) for the range
(respectively, domain; image) of this morphism. Note that Rj, Dj,a n dIj are all vector
bundles on Sk. Indeed, this is clear away from inﬁnity; near inﬁnity, it follows from the
fact that Sk is smooth over k near inﬁnity. Thus, we have an inclusion
Ij ⊆R j
of vector bundles onSk which is an equality away from inﬁnity. We wish to show that this
inclusion is an equality over all of Sk.
Now let us suppose that:
Id = Rd
Then I claim that it follows that Ij = Rj for all j =1 ,... ,d. Indeed, this follows by
considering degrees, as in the proof of Theorem 3.1. That is to say, the fact that the natural
projections of (3) are surjective (over S), combined with the fact that the push-forward
(fS)∗(L|E∞ ,S ) commutes with base-change (cf. the last part of Lemma 2.2), implies that
if there were a single j such that Ij ̸= Rj = Fj(Rd), then summing up over the various
(Fj/Fj−1)(Rd)’s and Ij/Ij−1’s, we obtain that
219

deg(Rd) >
∑
ι
d∑
j=1
{d · (aι)j−1 +d e g ( (fS)∗(L|E∞ ,S ⊗OS τ⊗j−1
E ))}
=d e g ( (fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<j {v,et}⊗ O Q)
=d e g ( (fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<j {v,et}⊗ O k)
=d e g (Dd)
=d e g (Rd)
(where the ﬁrst equality follows from Theorem 3.1, (2); the second equality follows from
the fact that the degree of a vector bundle on S is locally constant over Spec( O); the
third equality follows from the deﬁnition of Dd;a n dt h efourth equality follows from the
assumption Id = Rd). Thus, we get a contradiction; this completes the proof of the claim.
Thus, it suﬃces to prove that
Id = Rd
Since this assertion is local at inﬁnity, we will assume in the rest of the proof that
S =S p e c (O[[q
1
M ]])
for some positive integer M. To conclude that Id = Rd, we would like to use the fact
that Ξ{v,et} is an isomorphism over S (by (2) in the “universal case”), so long as η does
not intersect dE. Now of course, in the case under consideration η might intersect dE.
Note, however, that if we modify η by some torsion point ηδ ∈ Ed(S) whose restriction to
the special ﬁber of Ed lies in the same connected component as that of the identity, then
this problem can be avoided. Note that (after possibly enlarging O)s u c ha nηδ always
exists (since we have localized near inﬁnity). Moreover, we may even assume that ηδ is
such that η′ def
= η+ ηδ does not intersect dE. Next, note that, by (2) in the “universal
case,” the “Ξ{v,et}” corresponding to such anη′ is an isomorphism. Since in fact, we are
interested in the situation with the original η, we observe that (by translating by−ηδ)w e
can interpret the fact that we get an isomorphism when η is replaced by η′ as saying that
the evaluation map
(fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{v,et}→ (fS)∗(L|
(−η†
δ +dE†
∞ )
)
(where η†
δ is the natural lifting of ηδ to E†
∞ ,[d]) is an isomorphism. Tensoring with k,w e
thus obtain that the evaluation map
220

(fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{v,et}⊗ O k = Dd → (fS)∗(L|
(−η†
δ +dE†
∞ )
⊗O k)
is an isomorphism (since push-forwards for ﬁnite morphisms always commute with base-
change). But this morphism clearly factors through Rd (since sections of
(L⊗ OE∞ ,S
Ret
E†
∞ ,[d]
{v}) ⊗O k
over E∞ ,S ⊗O k can always be restricted to ( −η†
δ + dE†
∞ ) ⊗O k). In other words, the
morphism Dd →R d is bijective,s o Id = Rd, as desired. This completes the proof of
Theorem 4.1. ⃝
Remark. In fact, compatibility of base-change, i.e., Theorem 4.1, (1), may itself be regarded
as a sort of “analytic torsion property.” Thus, it is not surprising that the proof of Theorem
4.1, (1), makes essential use of Theorem 4.1, (3), in the “universal case.”
Bibliography
[Harts] R. Hartshorne, Algebraic Geometry, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 52, Springer
(1977).
[KM] N. Katz and B. Mazur, Arithmetic Moduli of Elliptic Curves, Annals of Mathematics
Studies 108, Princeton University Press (1985).
[Mats] H. Matsumura, Commutative Algebra (Second Edition) , The Benjamin/Cummings
Publishing Company (1980).
[SGA2] A. Grothendieck et al., Cohomologie locale des faisceaux coh´erents et th´eor`emes de
Lefshetz locaux et globaux, North-Holland, Amsterdam (1968).
221

Chapter VII: The Geometry of Function Spaces:
Systems of Orthogonal Functions
§0. Introduction
The purpose of the present Chapter is to prepare for the discussion of the Arakelov-
theoretic extension of the theory of Chapter VI in Chapter VIII by developing the theory
of systems of orthogonal functions in the form in which we will use it in this paper. Such
systems of orthogonal functions are central to the archimedean portion of the theory of
this paper. The reason for this is that the main result of this paper, i.e., the comparison
isomorphism between “ de Rham functions” (i.e., functions on the universal extension of
an elliptic curve, which is a sort of de Rham cohomology group of the elliptic curve) and
“´etale functions” (i.e., functions on the torsion points of the elliptic curve) is, after all, an
isomorphism between function spaces. To consider such function spaces in an Arakelov-
theoretic context thus amounts to considering such function spaces equipped with some
metric. Thus, in order to develop the natural Arakelov-theoretic extension of the theory
of Chapter VI, we must study the relationship between the natural metrics induced from
the de Rham and ´etale sides of the comparison isomorphism. Because function spaces
tend to be rather large and unwieldy, in order to study theirgeometry as metrized spaces,
it is of crucial importance to have natural and explicit orthonormal coordinate systems
at our disposal which allow us to express the diﬀerence between the geometries induced
by diﬀerent metrics in a precise and quantitative fashion. Such orthonormal coordinate
systems are provided by systems of orthogonal functions.
It turns out that the natural metrics arising from the de Rham and ´etale sides of the
comparison isomorphism are rather alien in nature to one another. It is thus diﬃcult to
compare them to one another directly. Thus, in order tointerpolate the diﬀerence between
them, we must introduce variousintermediate systems of orthogonal functions. This is the
main goal of the present Chapter. In §1, we begin by discussing the “general nonsense”
aspects of the theory of orthogonal functions. In §2, we review the theory ofLegendre and
Hermite polynomials, not only because they are perhaps the most fundamental examples
of orthogonal functions, but also because they play a crucial role in the theory of the
comparison isomorphism at the inﬁnite prime. In §3, we discuss the theory of the “discrete
Tchebycheﬀ polynomials,” which are a sort of discrete analogue of Legendre polynomials.
These polynomials also play an important role in the theory of this paper. In§4, we discuss
the metric arising from the de Rham side of the comparison isomorphism .T h e n i n§5,
we discuss the relationship between this geometry and the theory of canonical Schottky-
Weierstrass zeta functions. Finally, in §6, we begin our study of the geometry of the space
of canonical Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functions. The geometry of this function space will
be studied further in Chapter VIII.
222

In fact, the introduction of various types of canonical Schottky-Weierstrass zeta func-
tions is the ﬁrst and most crucial step in the interpolation between de Rham and ´etale
metrics referred to above. One way to think of this interpolation is the following: The de
Rham side of the comparison isomorphism involves functions on continuous spaces, i.e.,
more precisely, on the underlying real analytic manifold – which we denoteER –o fac o m -
plex elliptic curve E. On the other hand, the ´etale side of the comparison isomorphism
involves functions on some ﬁnite, discrete set of torsion points. Thus, in order to develop
an Arakelov-theoretic extension of the theory of Chapter VI, we must somehow bridge this
gap between continuous and ﬁnite, discrete spaces. Now note that E
R has precisely two
real dimensions. The passage (§5) from the de Rham-theoretic function space geometry of
§4 to the canonical Schottky-Weierstrass zeta function-based geometry of §6–w h i c hi sa
sort of function theory on S1 (which has precisely one real dimension) – then amounts to
the discretization of one of these two real dimensions. This discretization, which we refer
to as the ﬁrst discretization, turns out to be the most essential. The second discretization,
i.e., the discretization of the remaining S1, will be carried out in Chapter VIII. Thus,
schematically:
de Rham-based function theory on ER (dim/R =2 )
⇓
canonical Schottky-Weierstrass zeta function-based function theory on S1 (dim/R =1 )
⇓
function theory of functions on a discrete set of torsion points (dim/R =0 )
In some sense, this diagram represents the main theme behind the theory of the present
and following Chapters.
§1. The Orthogonalization Problem
In this §, we introduce the basic ideas and terminology surrounding the theory of
systems of orthogonal functions. We begin by discussing what we call theorthogonalization
problem.T h a t i s t o s a y , g i v e n aHilbert space equipped with a ﬁltration and an operator
satisfying certain properties, one wishes to construct a correspondingsystem of orthogonal
elements of the Hilbert space. We then discuss various basic invariants that one can
associate to such data – namely, the means and submeans of the system (cf. Deﬁnition
1.1). When the given operator is self-adjoint up to a constant multiple, it turns out that
the system of orthogonal elements is completely determined by a relatively small amount
of data, namely, the means and “principal submeans” (cf. Proposition 1.2). Finally, we
discuss various examples of this theory. We remark that the material that we treat here is
223

in essence well-known (cf., e.g., [Sze], [Bate]), but I do not know of a reference that treats
this material from the point of view that we take here.
We begin with a Hilbert space H over a base ﬁeld K, which we assume to be either
R or C. We will denote the inner product on H by (−, −) and its corresponding norm
by |−| . Let us assume that H is equipped with a ﬁltration of (not necessarily closed)
K-subspaces:
F −1(H)=0 ⊆ F0(H) ⊆ F1(H) ⊆ ... ⊆ Fn(H) ⊆ ... ⊆H
where n ranges over all integers< some ﬁxed N (where N ∈ Z ⋃ ∞ ). Moreover, we assume
that the subquotients Qn(H)
def
=( Fn/Fn−1)(H) satisfy:
dimK(Qn(H)) = 1
for all 0 ≤ n<N . Thus, in particular, if 0 ≤ n<N ,d i mK(Fn(H)) = n +1 . I nt h e
following, we will write
F ∞ (H)
def
=
N −1⋃
i=0
Fi(H); F ∞− 1(H)
def
=
N −2⋃
i=0
Fi(H)
for the union of all the (respectively, all but the last) subspace(s) in the ﬁltration.
Note that this data of Hilbert space plus ﬁltration already determinessplittings of the
ﬁltration
Fn(H)=
n⨁
i=0
Qi(H)
(for 0 ≤ n<N ) given by taking the orthogonal complement ofFn−1(H)i n Fn(H). Thus,
one can think of the Qn(H)a s subspaces of H. In its most basic form,
The orthogonalization problem is the problem of explicitly determining
these splittings of the ﬁltration F ∗(H).
What does to mean to “explicitly determine” the splittings? To give meaning to this
expression, it is typical to assume that one is also given a ( K-linear, but not necessarily
continuous) operator
X : F ∞− 1(H) → F ∞ (H)
Moreover, we assume that, for 0 ≤ n<N , X(Fn−1(H)) ⊆ Fn(H), and, moreover, that
the induced morphism
224

Qn−1(H) → Qn(H)
is an isomorphism. Put another way, if F0(H)= K · ϖ,t h e n
Fn(H)= {φ(X) · ϖ}
where φ(X) ranges over all polynomials in X with coeﬃcients in K of degree ≤ n.T h u s ,
if one is given such an operator X, then it makes sense to ask:
Can one explicitly determine some set of polynomials {φn(X)} (where
deg(φn(X)) = n; n ranges over all nonnegative integers) such that
φn(X) · ϖ generates the one-dimensional K-subspace Qn(H) ⊆H ?
This is the form of the orthogonalization problem that will appear most frequently in the
present Chapter. A mild variant of this problem involves ﬁndingφn(X)a sa b o v es u c ht h a t
φn(X) · ϖ not only generates Qn(H), but has norm equal to 1.
Let us assume that the set {φn(X) · ϖ} is orthonormal. Then we shall denote the
coeﬃcient of Xn−i in φn(X)b y κn,i ∈ K (cf. [Sze], Theorem 12.7.1). Thus,
φn(X)= κn,0 · Xn + κn,1 · Xn−1 +...+ κn,n
Note (cf. [Sze], §12.3) that the number μn
def
= |κn,0|−2 may also be characterized as the
inﬁmum
inf
φ(X)
|φ(X) · ϖ|2
where φ(X)= Xn + . . . is a polynomial in X (with coeﬃcients in K)o fd e g r e en with
leading coeﬃcient equal to 1. Note that this inﬁmum is attained for φ(X)
def
= κ−1
n,0 ·φn(X).
Deﬁnition 1.1. We shall refer to the numberμn = |κn,0|−2 as the n-th mean of the data
(H,F ∗(H),X ). We shall refer to the number rn,i
def
= κn,i/κn,0 (for 0 ≤ i ≤ n<N )a st h e
((n, i)-)submean of the data (H,F ∗(H),X ). The (n,1)-submean will be referred to as the
n-th principal submean.
Note that the means and submeans are uniquely determined by the data ( H,F ∗(H),X ).
Moreover, if one knows the means and submeans of this data, then one can immediately
reconstruct the system {φ
n(X)}, up to multiplication (of eachφn(X)) by an element ofK
of absolute value 1.
225

The reason for the terminology “ means” is the following: In a certain very basic and
representative case (cf. Example (3) below; [Sze], §12.3) involving polynomials which are
orthogonal with respect to a given weight function on the circle S1, the zeroth mean μ0
is, in fact, the arithmetic mean of the weight function (i.e., in the notation of Example (3)
below, the quantity 1
2π ·
∫ 2π
0 w(θ) dθ). Moreover, in this case, the higher means satisfy
μn ≤ μn−1 (for all positive integers n) and their limit μ∞
def
= limn→∞ μn is the geometric
mean of the weight function (i.e., in the notation of Example (3) below, the quantity
exp( 1
2π ·
∫ 2π
0 log(w(θ)) dθ)).
One of the most important cases of the orthogonalization problem is the case where the
operator X is self-adjoint up to a constant multiple, i.e., there exists some ﬁxed constant
αX ∈ K such that (X · v,w )= αX · (v,X · w), for all v,w ∈ F ∞ (H). In this case, the
polynomials {φn(X)} satisfy a recurrence relation:
Proposition 1.2. Assume that the operator X is self-adjoint up to a constant multiple
αX ∈ K. Then for 1 ≤ n<N − 1, we have
φn+1(X)=( AnX + Bn) · φn(X) − Cn · φn−1(X)
where An = κn+1,0/κn,0; Bn = An · (rn+1,1 − rn,1); Cn = αX · An/An−1 (where the
bar denotes complex conjugation). That is to say, the polynomials φn(X) are entirely
determined by the means and principal submeans.
Proof. The proof is essentially given in [Bate], pp. 158-9. In fact, [Bate] only treats the
case where H is some space of real-valued functions on an interval ( a, b) ⊆ R equipped
with the norm (f,g )
def
=
∫ b
a f ·g ·w arising from some weight functionw on (a, b), and X is
the operator given by multiplying by the standard coordinate onR. In fact, however, it is
not diﬃcult to see that the only properties of this data that are used in this proof are the
properties that we have assumed here. For instance, to see that (X ·φ
n(X)·ϖ,φ(X)·ϖ)=0
for all φ(X)o fd e g r e e≤ n − 2, it suﬃces to apply the self-adjointness (up to a constant
multiple) of X, which implies that
(φn(X) · ϖ,X · φ(X) · ϖ)=0
since X ·φ(X)i so fd e g r e e≤ n−1. The coeﬃcients An, Bn,a n dCn may then be determined
in the obvious fashion – cf. [Bate], pp. 158-9. ⃝
We conclude this § by listing some examples of the theory discussed so far. Some
examples are well-known; others are to be treated in the present and following Chapters.
226

Examples of Orthogonal Systems:
(1) Polynomials on intervals of the real line: Let (a, b) ⊆ R be an open interval in R
(where a, b ∈ R ⋃{±∞} ). Write x for the standard coordinate on R. Suppose that w(x)
is positive integrable function on ( a, b). Then we may form the Hilbert space L2
w(a, b)o f
K-valued functions f on (a, b) which satisfy
∫ b
a |f |2 · w · dx < ∞ . The inner product of
this Hilbert space is given by
(f,g )
def
=
∫ b
a
f · g · w · dx
(where g denotes the complex conjugate of g). Let us assume that for all n ≥ 0, xn ∈
L2
w(a, b). Then if we take
H
def
= L2
w(a, b); Fn(H)
def
= {cnxn +...+ c1x + c0 | c0,... ,cn ∈ K}; X
def
= x·
(i.e., X is the self-adjoint operator given by multiplication by x), we obtain data as in
the above discussion. The resulting φn(x)
def
= φn(X) · 1’s are thus orthonormal with
respect to the weight function w(x). This special case of the above discussion is the most
fundamental. Two of the most basic examples of this sort of orthogonal system are the
Legendre polynomials(where a = −1,b =1 ,w (x) = 1) and theHermite polynomials(where
a = −∞ ,b = ∞ ,w (x)= e
− 1
2 x2
). These two cases will be discussed in §2b e l o w .
(2) Polynomials on a ﬁnite set of points: This case is similar to (1). Instead of working
with an interval in R, however, we work with the ﬁnite set of points {0, ... ,d − 1}⊆ R.
We then consider a positiveweight function w(x)o n {0, ... ,d − 1}.T h eHilbert space H is
taken to be the set of K-valued functions f on {0, ... ,d − 1} with the inner product given
by
(f,g )
def
=
d−1∑
x=0
f(x) · g(x) · w(x)
Here, we take N = d, and for 0 ≤ n<N ,w el e t Fn(H) ⊆H be the subspace of poly-
nomials in x of degree ≤ n;a n dX the self-adjoint operator given by multiplication by x.
Just as was the case with (1), the present set-up (2) also has a long history, dating back
to the nineteenth century. The most basic example of this sort of orthogonal system is the
system of discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials (where w(x) = 1), to be reviewed in §3b e l o w
(cf. also [Sze], §2.8; [Bate], p. 223). As one might expect from the weight functions, the
discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials are a sort of discrete analogue of the Legendre polyno-
mials. Another basic example of (2) is the case of Krawtchouk polynomials,w h i c ha r ea
sort of discrete analogue of the Hermite polynomials (cf. [Sze], §2.82).
227

(3) Polynomials on the circle S1: Another important case is the case of a positive weight
function w(θ) on the unit circle S1.W e l e tH
def
= L2
w(S1) be the Hilbert space of com-
plex square integrable functions with respect to w on S1; Fn(H)
def
= {cnzn +...+ c1z +
c0 | c0,... ,cn ∈ C},w h e r en ≥ 0, and z
def
= eiθ;a n dX the operator given by multiplication
by z. There is a rich and well-developed concerning the resulting orthogonal systemφn(z)
– see, e.g., [Sze], Chapters XI, XII – which is in some senses more transparent then the
theory of Example (1). For instance, this theory gives rise to asymptotic formulas for the
φ
n(z)i nt e r m so fw(θ) (cf. [Sze], Chapter XII). Historically, one of the ﬁrst cases in which
this situation was investigated in detail was the case in which w(θ)i sg i v e nb yatheta
function on S1 (cf. [Sze2]). This case is particularly interesting in that it foreshadowed
the subsequent development of q-analogues of the classical orthogonal polynomials (such
as those of Legendre and Hermite).
(4) Derivatives of a weight function on the circle S1: In this case, we let H
def
= L2(S1)b e
the usual L2-space of square-integrable complex functions on S1. Moreover, we assume
that we are given a functionw(θ)o n S1 which is inﬁnitely diﬀerentiable (i.e., of class C∞ ).
Let X
def
= ∂
∂θ be the usual diﬀerentiation operator, and letFn(H)
def
= {cnXn +...+ c1X +
c0 | c0,... ,cn ∈ C}· w(θ), for n ≥ 0. Note that the adjoint of X is −X, so Proposition 1.2
applies. Thus, the φn(X)a r eentirely determined by the means and principal submeans.
In the present paper, the case where w(θ)i sa theta function will play an important role
(cf. §6, Deﬁnition 6.3; Chapter VIII).
(5) Sections of a line bundle on an elliptic curve: Let E be an elliptic curve over C,a n dL
be the line bundle deﬁned by the origin. Then L admits a Hermitian metric (unique up to
constant multiple) || ∼ || L whose curvature is translation invariant (cf.§4 for more details).
This Hermitian metric allows us to deﬁne theL2-space of square-integrable sectionss of H
satisfying
∫
E ||s||2
L < ∞ . We take H to be this L2-space, and (for n ≥ 0) Fn(H)t ob et h e
space of sections annihilated by ∂
n+1
.I tm a yb es h o w nt h a td i mC(Fn(H)) = n +1 . N o w
one wishes to compute the splittings of this ﬁltration deﬁned by the inner product on H.
This is done in §4 by using the adjoint ∂
∗
of ∂ (with respect to the inner product of H).
In particular, it is shown that if s is a generator of F0(H), then Qn(H) ⊆H is generated
by (∂
∗
)n(s) (cf. Theorem 4.5 of §4 below). Thus, if we take X to be ∂
∗
, then we see that
in this case, φn(X) is a constant multiple of Xn. This example will also play a key role in
the present paper and will be treated in detail in §4.
(6) The discrete version of (5): Let E and L be as in (5), and write HR for the Hilbert
space “ H” of (5). Fix a positive integer N,a n dl e tG ⊆ E be a cyclic subgroup of order
N.L e tη ∈ E be a torsion point which is /∈ G. Then it follows from Chapter VI, Theorem
3.1 (2), together with the theory of §4 of the present Chapter, that the restriction map
ΞR : FN −1(HR) →L | η+G
228

is bijective. Note that || ∼ || L deﬁnes a natural inner product on the N-dimensional C-
vector space L|η+G.T h u s ,L|η+G is a ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert space H.L e t Fn(H)
def
=
ΞR(Fn(HR)) ∼= Fn(HR) for 0 ≤ n<N ,a n dw r i t eX : F ∞− 1(H) → F ∞ (H) for the
operator induced by the “ X” of (5) (via the isomorphisms Fn(H) ∼= Fn(HR)). Then one
wishes to compute the resulting φn(X). Indeed,
The computation of theφn(X) in this case is the ultimate goal of the the-
ory of the present and following Chapters. In fact, it is essentially a tau-
tology that concretely speaking, the comparison of the metrized function
spaces of “de Rham functions” and “´etale functions” (cf. §0) amounts
to estimating the coeﬃcients of the φ
n(X).
Since this ultimate goal of comparing Examples (5) and (6) is too diﬃcult to achieve
directly, we relate Examples (5) and (6) by using a certain intermediate orthogonal system
which is a special case of Example (4) (i.e., the case where “ w(θ)” is a theta function).
Finally, we analyze this special case of Example (4) (cf. §6; Chapter VIII) by using the
well-known theories of Examples (1) and (2).
§2. Review of Legendre and Hermite Polynomials
In this §, we review the classical orthogonal polynomials of Legendre and Hermite.
These examples are important not only because they serve to illustrate the general theory
of orthogonal systems of functions, but also because they appear naturally in the theory
of the Hodge-Arakelov comparison isomorphism (Chapter VIII) as limiting cases of the
orthogonal functions arising from diﬀerential calculus on the “theta-weighted circle”.
We begin with the polynomials of Legendre:
Proposition 2.1. (Legendre Polynomials) For every integer n ≥ 0, we deﬁne:
P
n(T)
def
= 1
2n ·
[ n
2 ]∑
j=0
(−1)j
(n
j
)( 2n − 2j
n
)
· Tn−2j
(where [∼] denotes the greatest integer less than the real number in brackets). Thus,Pn(T)
is a polynomial of degreen whose leading term is given by2−n ·
(2n
n
)
·Tn and which satisﬁes
Pn(1) = 1.I np a r t i c u l a r ,
P0(T)=1 ; P1(T)= T
Moreover, the system of polynomials {Pn(T)} satisﬁes the following properties:
229

(1) (Orthogonality and Norms)
∫
[−1,1] Pm(T) · Pn(T)= 2
2n+1 · δmn.
(2) (Recurrence Formula)
(n +1 ) · Pn+1(T) − (2n +1 )T · PN (T)+ n · Pn−1(T)=0
for n ≥ 1.
(3) (Diﬀerential Equation)
(1 − T2)P ′′
n (T) − 2T · P ′
n(T)+ n(n +1 ) · Pn(T)=0 .
(4) (Rodrigues’ Formula) Pn(T)= 1
2n ·n! · ( d
dT )n{(T2 − 1)n}.
Proof. See, e.g., [Rice], pp. 47-48. Note that up to constant multiples, the Pn(T)a r e
determined uniquely by the following two properties: (i) Pn(T) is of degree precisely n;
(ii) if m ̸= n,t h e ntm(T)a n dtn(T) are orthogonal with respect to L2([−1,1]). ⃝
Next, we consider the polynomials of Hermite:
Proposition 2.2. (Hermite Polynomials) Let X be the standard coordinate on R.
Write D
def
= d
dX .F o rn ≥ 0, deﬁne
Hn(X)
def
= e
1
2 X2
· Dn(e− 1
2 X2
)
Thus, H0(X)=1 ; H1(X)= −X.L e t dα
def
= e− 1
2 X2
· dX, which we think of as a met-
ric/measure on R. Then for n ≥ 0,
(1) (Orthogonality and Norms)
∫ +∞
−∞
Hn(X) · Hm(X) · dα =( 2π)
1
2 · n! · δmn.
(2) (Explicit Formula)
Hn(X)=( −1)n · n! ·
[n/2]∑
m=0
(−2)−m · Xn−2m
m!( n − 2m)!
230

where [n/2] is n/2 (respectively, (n − 1)/2)i f n is even (respectively,
odd).
(3) (Alternate Deﬁnition) Hn(X)=( D − X)n(1).
(4) (Recurrence Formula)
Hn+1(X)+ X · Hn(X)= D(Hn(X)) = −n · Hn−1(X).
(5) (Diﬀerential Relations) If we set Φn(X)
def
= Hn(X) · e− 1
4 X2
,t h e n
(D − 1
2X) · Φn(X)=Φ n+1(X); ( D + 1
2X) · Φn(X)= −n · Φn−1(X);
(D2 − 1
4 · X2 − 1
2) · Φn(X)= −(n +1 ) · Φn(X).
Proof. The properties here all follow essentially from [Bate], p. 193. Since, however, we
use diﬀerent normalizations here from those of [Bate], we sketch the proofs here. First,
deﬁne the operator:
Dexp def
= e
1
2 X2
· D · e− 1
2 X2
Then by deﬁnition, Hn(X)=( Dexp)n(1). But one computes easily that
Dexp = e
1
2 X2
· (e− 1
2 X2
· D +[ D,e − 1
2 X2
])
= D + e
1
2 X2
· D(e− 1
2 X2
)
= D − X
This proves the “Alternate Deﬁnition.” The “Recurrence Formula” follows by applying
the operator-theoretic relation
D · (D − X)n =( D − X)n · D +[ D, (D − X)n]
=( D − X)n · D + n · (D − X)n−1 · [D,D − X]
=( D − X)n · D − n · (D − X)n−1
to the constant function 1. The “Diﬀerential Relations” follow by using ( D − X)(Hn)=
Hn+1; D(Hn)= −n · Hn−1; and the operator-theoretic relation (D2 − 1
4 X2) − 1
2 = D2 −
1
4 X2 − 1
2 [D,X ]=( D + 1
2 X)(D − 1
2 X). This operator
231

(D + 1
2X)(D − 1
2X)
is a sort of Laplacian operator, and is self-adjoint for the L2-norm on R equipped with
the usual measure (i.e., dX). Thus, the fact that the Φ n(X)’s are eigenfunctions for this
operator implies that they are mutually orthogonal. The integrals
∫ +∞
−∞
Φ2
n dX
may then be computed by using the fact that D + 1
2 X (respectively, D − 1
2 X) is adjoint
to −(D − 1
2 X) (respectively, −(D + 1
2 X)). Finally, the “Explicit Formula” may be proven
by applying induction on n and the relation Hn+1(X)=( D − X) · Hn(X). ⃝
Remark 1. In fact, the explicit formula given above (i.e., Proposition 2.2, (2)) may be
interpreted as a formula for any two operators A and B satisfying
[A, B]= c ∈ C
and A · v = 0, for some vector v. That is to say, the explicit formula implies that
(A + B)n · v = n! ·
[n/2]∑
m=0
(c/2)m · Bn−2m
m!( n − 2m)! · v
Indeed, this follows by thinking of A as λ−1 · D and of B as −λ−1 · X,w h e r eλ−2 = −c.
Remark 2. Thus, the theory of Hermite polynomials essentially amounts to harmonic
analysis with respect to the metric
dα
def
= e− 1
2 X2
· dX
on R. This is interesting relative to the main theme of this work, i.e., of a “comparison
isomorphism via theta functions,” since this sort of factor e− 1
2 X2
(i.e., an exponential
with a quadratic exponent) appears frequently in the theory of theta functions (cf., e.g.,
[Mumf3], §12, proof of Lemma 2, (II)). Indeed, from this point of view, one may think of
this factor as being essentially:
exp (Chern class of L) = exp (Riemann form of L)
Note that this sort of factor also appears in theadjustment of integral structure at inﬁnity
in Chapter VI, Theorem 3.1, (3), i.e., this adjustment of integral structure varies roughly
232

as the exponential of the “cj’s” ofloc. cit., which (cf. Chapter V, Schola 4.1) arequadratic
functions of j. This appearance of the exponential of a quadratic function in all of these
places is by no means a coincidence, as will become increasingly apparent to the reader as
he/she studies the material of this and the following Chapters.
§3. Discrete Tchebycheﬀ Polynomials and the
Fundamental Combinatorial Model
In this §, we discuss the theory of discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials. This theory may
be regarded as thearchimedean portionof the fundamental combinatorial modelunderlying
the theory of this paper. This combinatorial model is the evaluation map
Ξcb : Z[T]<d −→
d−1⨁
i=0
Z
T ↦→ (0,1,2,... ,d − 1)
given by evaluating polynomials in the indeterminate T of degree <d (for d a positive
integer) with integral coeﬃcients at the points T =0 ,1,2,... ,d − 1. In Chapter V (cf.,
especially, Chapter V, §6), we discussed the evaluation map Ξ cb at ﬁnite primes .I n
particular, we saw that if we adjust the integral structure in an appropriate fashion (cf.
Chapter III, §6; Chapter V, §3) – i.e., if we consider the submodule ofZ[T] ⊗Z Q generated
by the polynomials
T[n] def
= 1
n!T(T − 1)(T − 2) · ... · (T − n +1 )
– then the matrix corresponding to the evaluation map Ξ cb takes on the simple upper
triangular form
{T[i]|T=j }{i,j=0,1,2,...,d−1} =
⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝
1 ∗ ... ∗∗
0 1 ... ∗∗
... ... ...
00 . . . 01
⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠
which is manifestly bothintegral and invertibleat all ﬁnite primes. Unfortunately, however,
although the polynomials T[n] are very well-suited to analyzing the eﬀect of Ξ cb on the
integral structures at ﬁnite primes, they are not well-suited to analyzing Ξcb at the inﬁnite
233

(archimedean) prime. At the inﬁnite prime, the range of Ξ cb has a natural “ L2-metric”
given by:
||(a0,... ,ad−1)|| =( a2
0 +...+ a2
d−1)
1
2
(where a0,... ,ad−1 ∈ R). In the present §, we would like to analyze Ξcb relative to this
L2-metric on the range, i.e.,we would like to discuss the metric induced onZ[T]<d via Ξcb
by this L2-metric.
In the theory of Ξcb at archimedean primes, the polynomials that play the role of the
T[n] are the discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials discussed in [Bate], [Sze]. We summarize
their deﬁnition and basic properties in the following Proposition:
Proposition 3.1. (Discrete Tchebycheﬀ Polynomials) Fix a positive integer d.
Then we deﬁne, for n =0 ,1,2,... ,d − 1,
(1) (“Rodrigues’ Formula”) tn(T)
def
= n! · δn
[(T
n
)(T −d
n
)]
where, as usual, iff(T) is a polynomial inT,t h e nδ(f)(T)
def
= f(T +1) −f(T). (When it is
necessary to specify the dependence ond, we write tn,d(T) for tn(T).) Thus, for instance,
t0(T)=1 ; t1(T)=2 T − (d − 1)
and (for all n =0 ,1,2,... ,d − 1) the leading term of tn(T) is
(2n
n
)
· Tn. The polynomials
tn(T) form an orthogonal system of polynomials for the L2-norm (as deﬁned above) on
the space of functions on the set {0, 1,2,... ,d − 1}:
(2) (Orthogonality and Norms)
⟨ tn(T),tm(T) ⟩
def
=
d−1∑
T=0
tn(T) ·tm(T)=( 2 n+1) −1 ·d(d2 − 12)(d2 − 22)...( d2 − n2) ·δmn
for m, n =0 ,1,2,... ,d − 1 (where δmn is =0 if m ̸= n and =1 if
m = n).
Moreover, these polynomials also satisfy the following properties:
(3) (Recurrence Formula)
(n +1 ) · tn+1(T) − (2n + 1)(2T − d +1 ) · tn(T)+ n(d2 − n2)tn−1(T)=0
234

for n =1 ,2,... ,d − 1.
(4) (Diﬀerence Equation)
(T +2 ) (T − d +2 ) δ2(tn(T)) + [2T − d +3 − n(n +1 ) ]δ(tn(T)) − n(n +1 ) tn(T)=0
for n =0 ,1,2,... ,d − 1.
(5) (Connection with Legendre Polynomials)
lim
d→∞
d−n tn(d · T)= Pn(2T − 1)
for n =0 ,1,2,... ,d − 1. Here Pn(T) is the n-th Legendre polynomial
(cf. Proposition 2.1).
(6) (Connection with usual Monomials) For any real numberϵ> 0,
lim
d→∞
d−n(1+ϵ) tn(d1+ϵ · T)=
(2n
n
)
· Tn
for n =0 ,1,2,... ,d − 1.
Proof. See, e.g., [Bate], p. 223. The symbol T (respectively, δ(−); d) in our notation
corresponds to x (respectively, Δ; N) in the notation of loc. cit. Note that up to constant
multiples, the tn(T) are determined uniquely by the following two properties: (i) tn(T)
is of degree precisely n; (ii) if m ̸= n,t h e ntm(T)a n dtn(T) are orthogonal with respect
to L2({0,1,... ,d − 1}). The only result listed in Proposition 3.1 that cannot be found
in [Bate] is the connection with “the usual monomials Tn.” But this follows immediately
from Rodrigues’ formula, which, in the limit, takes on the form
1
n! · ( d
dT )n(T2n)=
(2n
n
)
· Tn
as desired. ⃝
Remark 1. Note that the various properties of the Legendre polynomials listed in Proposi-
tion 2.1 may all be obtained by passing to the limit d →∞ from the corresponding prop-
erties listed in Proposition 3.1. Thus, the discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials are discrete
versions of the Legendre polynomials. The Legendre polynomials appear (by substituting
“cos(θ)” for T) as eigenfunctions of the Laplacian operator on the sphere (equipped with
its unique rotation invariant metric). Indeed, the diﬀerential equation which states that
P
n(cos(θ)) is an eigenfunction of this Laplacian with eigenvalue n(n + 1) may be written
235

entirely in terms of T and is, in fact, the diﬀerential equation that appears in Proposition
2.1. Thus, the discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials may be regarded as discrete versions of the
eigenfunctions of the Laplacian on the sphere.
Remark 2. Note that while the limit of the discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials as the length
of the interval under consideration remains ﬁxed and equal to 1 is given by the Legendre
polynomials (Proposition 3.1, (5)), the limit of the discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials as the
length of the interval under consideration → 0 is simply the system of “usual monomials”
T
n (up to constant multiples – cf. Proposition 3.1, (6)). That is to say, just as the
Legendre polynomials are “metrically suited” to reﬂect the geometry of the unit interval,
the usual monomials are functions which are “metrically suited” to reﬂect the geometry of
an inﬁnitesimal neighborhood of a point . It is for this reason that such functions appear
naturally in the theory of Taylor series, i.e., the theory of expansions of functions in an
inﬁnitesimal neighborhood of a point.
The main result that we wish to prove in this § is the following (Proposition 3.2),
concerning a bound on the coeﬃcients of the discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials . First,
let us introduce some notation: Write c
n
k [d] for the coeﬃcient of Tk in the polynomial
d−n · tn,d(d · T) (cf. Proposition 2.1). Thus,
cn
k [d]=C o e ﬀTk
{ 1
dn · tn(d · T)
}
= 1
dn−k · CoeﬀTk
{
tn(T)
}
(where “Coeﬀ A(B)” denotes “the coeﬃcient of the monomial A in the polynomial B”).
Proposition 3.2. Let us write
˜tn(T)
def
= d
1
2
|| tn || · tn(d · T)
(where “ || ∼ || ” denotes theL2-norm on {0, 1,... d − 1}). Then:
(i.) cn
k [d] ≤ e2n;
(ii.) 1 ≤ dn+ 1
2
|| tn || ≤ (2n +1 )
1
2 · en+1 ≤ 3 · e2n;
CoeﬀTk
{
˜tn(T)
}
≤ (2n +1 )
1
2 · e3n+1 ≤ 3 · e4n;
(iii.) CoeﬀTn
{
˜tn(T)
}
≥ cn
n[d]=
(2n
n
)
≥ 1;
for all integers d, n, ksuch that 0 ≤ k ≤ n ≤ d − 1.
236

Proof. Let us ﬁrst prove (i.). First, note that d0 · t0(d · T)=1 ; d−1 · t1(d · T)=
d−1(2d · T +1 − d)= T − 1+ d−1, so the inequality of (i.) is satisﬁed for n =0 ,1. Now
we apply the “Recurrence Formula” (cf. Proposition 3.1, (3)), and induction on n.T h i s
gives us:
⏐⏐⏐ CoeﬀTk
{
d−n−1 · tn+1(d · T)
} ⏐⏐⏐ =
⏐⏐⏐ CoeﬀTk
{
(2n +1
n +1 )(2d · T − d +1 ) · d−n−1 · tn(d · T)
− ( n
n +1 )(d2 − n2)d−n−1 · tn−1(d · T)
} ⏐⏐⏐
≤
⏐⏐⏐ CoeﬀTk
{
2(2T − 1+ d−1) · d−n · tn(d · T)
} ⏐⏐⏐
+
⏐⏐⏐ CoeﬀTk
{
d−(n−1) · tn−1(d · T)
} ⏐⏐⏐
≤ 4 ·
⏐⏐⏐ CoeﬀTk−1
{
d−n · tn(d · T)
} ⏐⏐⏐
+2 ·
⏐⏐
⏐ Coeﬀ
Tk
{
d−n · tn(d · T)
} ⏐⏐
⏐
+
⏐⏐⏐ Coeﬀ
Tk
{
d−(n−1) · tn−1(d · T)
} ⏐⏐⏐
≤ 4 · 7n +2 · 7n +7 n−1 ≤ 7n
Since e2 ≥ 7, this completes the proof of (i.).
To derive (ii.) from (i.), it suﬃces (by Proposition 3.1, (2)) to bound
1 ≤ (2n +1 )
1
2 · dn
(d2 − 12)
1
2 · (d2 − 22)
1
2 · ... · (d2 − n2)
1
2
=( 2n +1 )
1
2 · dn ·
{(d − n − 1)! · d
(d + n)!
}1
2
By Stirling’s Formula(reviewed below – cf. Lemma 3.5), it follows that this last expression
may be bounded by
(2n+1)
1
2 ·
{d2n+1 · (d − n − 1)d−n−1 · e−(d−n−1) · (d − n − 1)
1
2 · e
(d + n)d+n · e−(d+n) · (d + n)
1
2
}1
2
≤ (2n+1)
1
2 ·en+1 ≤ 3·e2n
as desired. This completes the proof of (ii.) (as well as the proof of the ﬁrst inequality of
(iii.)). That cn
n[d]=
(2n
n
)
≥ 1 follows immediately from Proposition 3.1, (1) (and the fact
that the leading term of
(T
n
)
,
(T −d
n
)
is 1
n! Tn). ⃝
Before proceeding, we would also like tobound the coeﬃcients of the polynomialsT[n].
237

Proposition 3.3. Let n be a positive integer. Then the coeﬃcients of the polynomial
T[n] def
= 1
n! · T(T − 1) · ... · (T − (n − 1))
satisfy (for k =0 ,... ,n)
CoeﬀTk (T[n]) ≤ e2n
nk
In particular, if n ≤ d,t h e n
Coeﬀ(T/d)k (T[n]) ≤ e2n ·
(d
n
)k
≤ e2n ·
(d
n
)n
≤ e2n+d
Proof. If one expands the polynomial T(T − 1) ·... ·(T − (n − 1)), one sees that there are
≤
(n
k
)
terms of degree k, each of which has a coeﬃcient whose absolute value is a product
of n − k positive integers ≤ n. It thus follows that
CoeﬀTk (T[n]) ≤
(n
k
)
· nn−k
n!
≤ 2n · nn−k
nn · e−n
≤ e2n
nk
(where in the second inequality, we use Lemma 3.5 below). Ifn ≤ d,t h e n(d/n)k ≤ (d/n)n.
Finally, by Lemma 3.6, (d/n)n ≤ ed. ⃝
Next, we return to the combinatorial evaluation map:
Ξcb : Z[T]<d −→
d−1⨁
i=0
Z
As discussed earlier, the range admits a natural “ L2-norm,” hence deﬁnes an arithmetic
vector bundle (cf. Chapter I, Deﬁnition 1.1) over Q, which we denote by Φ et (for “´etale
function space”). Next, let us denote by Φ DR (for “de Rham function space”) the arith-
metic vector bundle deﬁned by Q[T]<d equipped with: (i.) the metric induced by the
L2-metric on Φ et via Ξcb at the inﬁnite prime of Q; (ii.) the integral structure deﬁned
238

by T[0],T [1],... ,T [d−1] at the ﬁnite primes of Q.T h u s , Ξcb induces an isomorphism of
arithmetic vector bundles:
ΦDR ∼= Φet
Let us denote the ﬁltration on Φ DR given by considering polynomials of degree <n by
Fn(ΦDR). Note that since Φet is a direct sum of trivial arithmetic line bundles, it follows
that
d−1∑
n=0
deg{(Fn+1/Fn)(ΦDR)} =d e g ( ΦDR)=d e g ( Φet)=0
In fact, if we compute the “zeroes and poles” of the rational section of the arithmetic line
bundle
Ln
def
=( Fn+1/Fn)(ΦDR)
deﬁned by Tn, we see (cf. Proposition 3.1, (2); Proposition 3.2, (iii.)) that
deg(Ln)=l o g (n!) + log(||tn||−1 · CoeﬀTn (tn(T)))
= log(n!) + log
((2n
n
)
· (2n +1 )
1
2 · ((d − n − 1)!)
1
2
((d + n)!)
1
2
)
(where the ﬁrst (respectively, second) “log” represents the contribution arising from the
ﬁnite (respectively, inﬁnite) places). In fact, the fact that the sum of the deg( Ln)’s is 0
may be checked directly as follows:
Proposition 3.4. The degree of Ln
deg(Ln)=l o g (n!) + log(||tn||−1 · CoeﬀTn (tn(T)))
satisﬁes
| n · log(n/d)+ 1
2 · log(d) − deg(Ln) |≤ 4n +2
Moreover, the sum of the deg(Ln)’s satisﬁes:
d−1∏
n=0
exp(deg(Ln)) =
d−1∏
n=0
n! ·
(2n
n
)
·
((2n +1 ) · (d − 1 − n)!
(d + n)!
)1
2
=1
239

(for any positive integer n).
Proof. The inequality concerning deg(Ln) follows immediately from Proposition 3.2, (ii.),
and Lemma 3.5 below. Thus, it remains to prove the assertion concerning the sum of the
deg(L
n)’s. Although it is not logically necessary for the proof, we ﬁrst observe that the
fact that the sum of the deg(Ln)’s is zero is compatible with the inequalities just proven.
Indeed, we have
( d−1∏
n=1
(d
n
)n
· d
1
2
)
≥ 1
while (by Lemma 3.6 below)
( d−1∏
n=1
(d
n
)n
· d
1
2
)
·
( d−1∏
n=0
e−4n−2
)
≤
( d−1∏
n=1
ed · e
1
2 ·log(d)
)
· e−2d2
≤ ed(d+1
2 ·d)−2d2
≤ 1
as desired.
Now we prove exact equality. For simplicity, we treat the case of d odd; the case of d
even is similar (only easier). We compute:
d−1∏
n=0
(2n +1 ) · (d − 1 − n)!
(d + n)! =1 · 3 · 5 · ... · (2d − 1) ·
( 1! · 2! · ... · (d − 1)!
d! · (d +1 ) !· ... · (2d − 1)!
)
= {1 · 3 · 5 · ... · (d − 2)}2·
( (2!)2 · (4!)2 · ... · ((d − 3)!)2 · (d − 1)!
(d − 1)! · ((d +1 ) ! )2 · ((d +3 ) ! )2 · ... · ((2d − 2)!)2
)
If we multiply the square root of this expression by ∏d−1
n=0
(2n
n
)
, we obtain:
( 2! · 4! · ... · (2d − 2)!
(1! · 2! · ... · (d − 1)!)2
)
·
(
1 · 3 · ... · (d − 2) · (2!) · (4!) · ... · (d − 3)! · (d − 1)!
(d − 1)! · (d +1 ) !· (d +3 ) !· ... · (2d − 2)!
)
=
( 2! · 4! · ... · (d − 1)!
1! · 2! · 3! · ... · (d − 1)!
)2
·
(1 · 3 · 5 · ... · (d − 2)
(d − 1)!
)
=
( (2! · 4! · ... · (d − 3)!)2
1! · 2! · 3! · ... · (d − 1)!
)
·
( 1
(2! · 4! · ... · (d − 3)!)2
)
= 1
1! · 2! · 3! · ... · (d − 1)!
240

as desired. ⃝
Before continuing, we review the following well-known elementary Lemmas, which we
will use often throughout this Chapter:
Lemma 3.5. (Stirling’s Formula) If n is a positive integer, then
n!= nn · e−n · √n ·
√
2π · Θn
where Θn is a real number satisfying 1 ≤ Θn ≤ e.
Proof. For a precise statement of Stirling’s formula, we refer to [Ahlf], Chapter 5, §2.5,
Ex. 2. The inequalities stated here are formal consequences of Stirling’s formula stated in
this form. ⃝
Lemma 3.6. If x, y are positive real numbers, then(
y
x )x ≤ e
y
e .
Proof. By letting u
def
= y
x , we see that it suﬃces to prove that u ≤ e
u
e , or, equivalently,
that f(u)
def
= u − e ·log(u)i s ≥ 0 for all positive real u. Now note that f ′(u)=1 − e
u is 0 if
and only if u = e. Moreover, since f(e)=0 , f(0) = +∞ , f(+∞ )=+ ∞ , we thus conclude
that f(u) ≥ 0 for all positive real u, as desired. ⃝
The above discussion of the fundamental combinatorial model at ﬁnite and inﬁnite
primes, together with Remark 2 following Proposition 3.1, motivate the followingpoint of
view: Fix an integer n ≥ 2. Then let us consider the limit
lim
d→∞
tn,d(dλ · T)
dλ·n · CoeﬀTn (tn,d(T))
where λ ∈ R, and “Coeﬀ Tn (−)” denotes the coeﬃcient of Tn in the polynomial in paren-
theses. Proposition 3.1, (6), states that when λ> 1, this limit exists and is equal to Tn.
Proposition 3.1, (5), states that when λ =1 , this limit exists and is equal to a polynomial
of degreen whose leading term is Tn, but which has (as one sees from the explicit formula
for the Legendre polynomials given in Proposition 2.1)nonzero terms of lower degree.T h e
fact that there exist nonzero terms of lower degree implies that if λ< 1, then the above
limit diverges. Thus, we see that “ λ = 1” is a distinguished value associated to the family
of systems of discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials that one obtains as d varies.
Terminology 3.7. We shall refer to this special exponent λ of the scaling factor d as
the slope of this family of orthogonal systems on ﬁnite discrete sets.
241

Later in this Chapter (cf. §6, especially Theorem 6.7), we shall encounter another
family of orthogonal systems on ﬁnite discrete sets whose slope is 1
2 and whose limit is the
Hermite polynomials. On the other hand, the natural system of polynomials at the ﬁnite
primes, i.e., the binomial coeﬃcient polynomials T[n] (cf. the discussion at the beginning
of this §), have slope 0, i.e., the exact same polynomials T[n] capture the integral structure
at ﬁnite primes of Z-valued functions on the set {0, ... ,d − 1}, regardless of the size of d.
It turns out that the combinatorics of these three types of systems,
i.e., Legendre, Hermite, and binomial,a r efundamental to the theory of
the comparison isomorphism at archimedean places (cf. Chapter VIII).
Moreover, in Chapter VIII, we shall see that these three types of systems
form the fundamentalmodels of approximation that allow us to estimate
the diﬀerence between the natural metrics on the spaces of “de Rham
functions” and “´etale functions” (cf. §0).
Also, it is interesting to note that the slopes of these three models, i.e., 1,
1
2 , and 0, are
exactly the same as theslopes of Frobeniusthat appear in the Frobenius action on the ﬁrst
crystalline cohomology group associated to an elliptic curve in characteristic p. Indeed,
it is precisely because we feel that there is a deep analogy between these two notions of
“slope” that we chose the name “slope” for the invariant λ of the above discussion. For
more on this analogy, we refer to the discussion of §6.
§4. The K¨ahler Geometry of a Polarized Elliptic Curve
In this §, we study the K¨ahler geometry of a polarized elliptic curve (i.e., an elliptic
curve equipped with a line bundle of degree 1) over C. Since the underlying real analytic
manifold of such an elliptic curve is a two (real) dimensionaltorus, it is natural to expect
that the topology of the toruswill play a fundamental role in our analysis. In fact, the key
technology that we will use in this § is a sort of Lie algebra version of the theta groups
discussed in Chapter IV, §1. That is to say, just as the theta group of a line bundle may
essentially be thought of as the extension of (a certain portion of) the ´etale fundamental
group of the elliptic curve determined by the ´etale cohomological ﬁrst Chern class ( ∈ H2
et
– i.e., the “Weil pairing”) of the line bundle in question, the “diﬀerential theta group”
that we consider here may be thought of as the extension of the topological fundamental
group tensored with C determined by the diﬀerential-geometric ﬁrst Chern class of the
line bundle in question. This technology will allow us to analyze (in terms of various
diﬀerential operators) the structure of certain natural metrics on the space of sections of
the line bundle in question over the universal extension of the elliptic curve. This analysis
will be important in the following §’s since it will allow us to relate these natural metrics
to the canonical Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functions of Chapter III, §7; Chapter IV, §3.
We remark that the material of this § is “in principle well-known,” but we do not know
an adequate reference for it.
242

Let E be an elliptic curve over C. We shall often write E for the complex manifold
deﬁned by the given (algebraic) elliptic curve. Let us write ER (respectively, E†
R) for the
underlying real analytic manifoldassociated to E (respectively, the universal extensionE†
of E). Then recall (cf. Chapter III, Deﬁnition 3.2) that we have a canonical real analytic
section
κR : ER → E†
R
of the universal extensionE† → E of E. This section κR is the unique real analytic section
that respects the group structures of ER, E†
R.
Let us write R
E† for the subsheaf of the push-forward of O
E† to OE consisting of
sections of ﬁnite torsorial degree (cf. Chapter III, Deﬁnition 2.2). Thus, R
E† admits an
exhaustive ﬁltration {Fn(R
E† )},w h e r eFn(R
E† ) is the subsheaf of sections of torsorial
degree <n .I n p a r t i c u l a r ,Fn(R
E† ) is a holomorphic vector bundle of rank n on E.
Moreover,
(Fn+1/Fn)(R
E† )= τ⊗n
E ⊗C OE
(where τE = ω∨
E,a n dωE is the cotangent space to E at the origin). Next, let us observe
that the real analytic splitting κR of the torsor E† → E induces a real analytic splitting
of the ﬁltration on R
E† :
R
E† ⊗OE OER =
⨁
n≥0
τ⊗n
E ⊗C OER
Here, we write OER for the sheaf of complex-valued real analytic functions onER.
Now let dμ be the unique (real analytic) (1 ,1)-form on E which is invariant with
respect to translation by elements of E and whose integral satisﬁes:
∫
E
dμ =1
Write
L
def
= OE(eE)
(where eE is the origin of E). Thus, L is a holomorphic line bundle on E.W r i t eLR
def
=
L⊗ OE OER .L e t|| ∼ || L be a Hermitian metric on L whose curvature Θ L (i.e., the (1,1)-
form given locally by ∂∂ log(||s||L), where s is a nonvanishing holomorphic section of L)
satisﬁes:
243

1
2πi · Θ L = dμ
(Such a Hermitian metric always exists, and, moreover, is unique up to a positive real
constant multiple – cf., e.g., [Mumf1,2,3],§12, Corollary to Lemma 1.) Note thatdμinduces
a metric || ∼ || τ on τE; || ∼ || L and dμ induce a metric || ∼ || VR on VR
def
=Γ (ER, LR):
||φ||2
VR
def
=
∫
E
||φ||2
L · dμ
(for φ ∈ VR).
In the following discussion, it will be useful to trivialize ωE once and for all by some
diﬀerential form θ such that ||θ||ω =1( w h e r e|| ∼ || ω is the dual metric to || ∼ || τ).
Thus, θalso deﬁnes a trivialization θ∨ of τE, as well as trivializationsθ, θ
∨
of the complex
conjugates of ωE and τE. Moreover, one checks easily thatθ∧θis imaginary (i.e., complex
conjugation acts on it by multiplication by −1). Thus,
θ∧ θ= −i · dμ
(where the sign preceding “ i” may be checked by computing using local coordinates).
Moreover, the trivialization θ∨ allows us to think of
R
E† ⊗OE OER =
⨁
n≥0
τ⊗n
E ⊗C OER
as the OER -algebra OER [TDR]o f polynomials in the indeterminate TDR.
Now write
Vn
def
=Γ (E, L⊗ OE Fn(R
E† ))
Then we can deﬁne two natural metrics on Vn, as follows:
(1) Let s ∈ Vn. Then the above real analytic splitting of the ﬁltration on
R
E† induces a decomposition of s into components: s = s[0] + s[1] ·
TDR +...+ s[n − 1] · Tn−1
DR ,w h e r es[i] ∈ VR. Now we deﬁne
||s||L2
DR
def
=
∑
i
||s[i]||VR
We shall refer to this metric as the L2
DR-metric on Vn.
244

(2) Let s ∈ Vn. Then one may think of s as a (holomorphic) section of L
over E† . If we pull-back this section via κR,w eo b t a i nareal analytic
section sR ∈ VR. (Note that in the notation of (1) above, sR = s[0].)
Then we deﬁne
||s||L2
R
def
= ||sR||VR
We shall refer to this metric as the L2
R-metric on Vn.
One of the goals of this § is to describe the precise relationship between the L2
DR-a n d
L2
R-metrics.
To do this, we must introduce various diﬀerential operators, as follows. First, let us
denote by
∇ R : LR →L R ⊗OER
ΩER
(where ΩER is the rank two locally free OER -module of (complex-valued) diﬀerentials on
ER) naturally associated to the metric || ∼ || L (cf., e.g., [Wells], Chapter III, Theorem
2.1). Then the decomposition
ΩER =Ω 1,0
ER ⊕ Ω0,1
ER
(where Ω1,0
ER =Ω E ⊗OE OER ,a n dΩ0,1
ER is the complex conjugate of Ω1,0
ER ) induces a decom-
position
∇ R = ∇1,0 ⊕∇ 0,1
where ∇0,1 is simply the ∂-operator on L. If we think of E† → E as the torsor of
holomorphic connections on L−1 (cf. Chapter III, Theorem 4.2), then we see that the
(1,0)-component ∇1,0 induces a real analytic section
κ∇
R : ER → E†
R
Moreover:
Proposition 4.1. We have: κR = κ∇
R, i.e., the canonical real analytic section κR of
Chapter III, Deﬁnition 3.2, is the same as the real analytic section deﬁned by the canonical
connection ∇
R associated to || ∼ || L.
245

Proof. Since E† → E is a holomorphic torsor, we may consider∂ of real analytic sections
s of this torsor. Such a ∂(s) will be a real analytic (1,1)-form on E whose integral
∫
E
∂(s)= −1
is precisely the class in H1(E, ΩE) ∼= C corresponding to the torsor E† → E.N e x t , l e t
us observe that (it follows from the deﬁnitions that) ∂(κ∇
R)i s a constant multiple of the
curvature Θ L, hence is translation invariant. On the other hand, one sees immediately
from the deﬁnition of κR (cf. Chapter III, Deﬁnition 3.2) – which is essentially a matter
of linear algebra – that ∂(κR) is also translation invariant. Thus, if we writeη
def
= κR − κ∇
R
for the (1,0)-form on E given by the diﬀerence between the two sections in question, we
see that ∂(η) is a translation invariant (1,1)-form whose integral is zero.T h u s ,∂(η)=0 ,
i.e., η is holomorphic.M o r e o v e r ,η ∈ Γ(E, ΩE)= ωE will be zero if it is invariant under
pull-back by the automorphism α : E → E given by multiplication by −1. On the other
hand, it is clear from the deﬁnitions that both κR and κ∇
R are invariant with respect to
α.T h u s ,α(η)= η, which implies that η = 0, as desired (cf. the proof of Chapter III,
Theorem 5.6). ⃝
Remark. Note that ifGm → E = Gm/qZ is a Schottky uniformization (as in the discussion
preceding Chapter III, Deﬁnition 3.3), then the splitting
κΛ1 : Gm → E† |Gm
of Chapter III, Deﬁnition 3.3, coincides with κR on S1 ⊆ C× = Gm. (Here, note that
since S1 ⋂ qZ = {1},w ea l s oh a v ea ni n c l u s i o nS1 ↪→ Gm/qZ = E.) Indeed, this follows
from the fact that both κR|S1 and κΛ1 |S1 are continuous group homomorphisms. Thus,
their diﬀerence is a continuous group homomorphism S1 → ωE (∼= C), hence is zero.
This coincidence of κR and κΛ1 on S1 ⊆ Gm,E will be important in the computations of
this Chapter since it will allow us to relate the real analytic theory of the present § to the
arithmetic Schottky uniformizations over Z that appeared throughout Chapters III-VI.
Now we would like to study the various diﬀerential operators introduced above. Recall
that in the above discussion, we chose trivializationsθ, θof ωE, ωE (the complex conjugate
of ωE). These trivializations allow us to regard the operators ∇1,0 and ∇0,1 as operators
on VR =Γ (ER, LR). Note that the L2-norm || ∼ || VR deﬁned above on VR corresponds
naturally to an inner product ⟨− , −⟩ VR on VR.
Proposition 4.2. We have: (∇1,0)∗ = ∇0,1; (∇0,1)∗ = ∇1,0 (where “ ∗” denotes the
adjoint of an operator on VR equipped with the inner product ⟨− , −⟩ VR ).
Proof. Indeed, if φ, ψ∈ VR,t h e n
246

⟨∇ 1,0(φ),ψ ⟩VR =
∫
E
i ·⟨ ∇ 1,0(φ) · θ,ψ · θ ⟩L
=
∫
E
i ·⟨ ∇ R(φ),ψ · θ ⟩L
= −
∫
E
i ·⟨ φ,∇ R(ψ · θ) ⟩L +
∫
E
i · d ⟨ φ, ψ· θ ⟩L
= −
∫
E
i ·⟨ φ,∇ R(ψ · θ) ⟩L
=
∫
E
i ·⟨ φ,∇0,1(ψ) · θ∧ θ ⟩L
=
∫
E
⟨ φ,∇0,1(ψ) ⟩L · dμ = ⟨ φ,∇0,1(ψ) ⟩VR
Here, the second (respectively, third; fourth; ﬁfth) equality follows from the fact that all
(0,2)-forms are identically zero (respectively, the fact that∇ R preserves the metric|| ∼ || L;
Stokes’ theorem; the fact that all (2,0)-forms are identically zero), and we recall that
θ∧ θ= −i · dμ
Thus, (∇1,0)∗ = ∇0,1, as desired. The relation ( ∇0,1)∗ = ∇1,0 follows similarly. ⃝
Thus, in the following, we shall simply write:
∂
∗ def
= ∇1,0; ∂
def
= ∇0,1
Put another way, ∂
∗
(respectively, ∂)i ss i m p l y∇ R evaluated in the direction θ∨ (respec-
tively, θ
∨
).
Proposition 4.3. We have: [∂
∗
,∂]= −2π.
Proof. Note that [θ∨,θ
∨
] = 0. (Indeed, this follows from the fact that the Lie algebra of
the complex Lie group E† is abelian!) Thus, it follows from the deﬁnitions (cf. [Wells],
Chapter III, Proposition 1.9) that [∂
∗
,∂] is simply the curvature ΘL (which is a (1,1)-form)
divided by θ∧ θ= −i · dμ, i.e., [∂
∗
,∂]= −2π,a sd e s i r e d .⃝
Remark. One can now deﬁne the Lie algebra Gdiﬀ
L to be the Lie algebra (over C)o f
operators on VR generated by 1,∂,∂
∗
. Thus, we have an exact sequence
0 → C · 1 →G diﬀ
L → Lie(E† ) → 0
247

where C · 1 is central in Gdiﬀ
L ,a n dL i e (E† )= C · ∂
∗
+ C · ∂ is the Lie algebra of E† .
Moreover, the commutator product of Gdiﬀ
L deﬁnes a bilinear morphism
Lie(E† ) × Lie(E† ) → C
that maps (∂
∗
,∂) ↦→− 2π (by Proposition 4.3). This bilinear form is essentially the “dif-
ferential geometric” ﬁrst Chern class of the line bundle L. Thus, this “diﬀerential theta
group” Gdiﬀ
L is very much analogous to the “´etale theta groups” reviewed in Chapter IV,
§1.
Next, we would like to consider the following Laplacian operator on VR:
Δ
def
= 1
2π · ∂
∗
· ∂
Then we have the following:
Proposition 4.4. We have:
(i.) Δ ∗ =Δ
(ii.) Δ · ∂ = ∂ · (Δ − 1)
(iii.) Δ · ∂
∗
= ∂
∗
· (Δ + 1)
In particular, the eigenvalues of Δ are all real and nonnegative , and eigenfunctions of
Δ with distinct eigenvalues are orthogonal to one another (with respect to ⟨− , −⟩ VR ).
Moreover, if, for s ∈ VR, λ ∈ R, we have Δ( s)= λ · s,t h e nΔ( ∂(s)) = (λ − 1) · (∂(s));
Δ( ∂
∗
(s)) = (λ+1 ) · (∂
∗
(s)).
Proof. (i.) Since (∂)∗ = ∂
∗
,( ∂
∗
)∗ = ∂, we obtain immediately that Δ ∗ =Δ .
(ii.) Compute (using Proposition 4.3): 2π·Δ ·∂ = ∂
∗
·∂·∂ = ∂·∂
∗
·∂−2π·∂ =2 π·(∂·Δ −∂).
(iii.) Compute (using Proposition 4.3): 2 π · Δ · ∂
∗
= ∂
∗
· ∂ · ∂
∗
= ∂
∗
· ∂
∗
· ∂ +2 π · ∂
∗
=
2π · (∂
∗
· Δ+ ∂
∗
).
The ﬁnal remarks — except for the fact that the eigenvalues are ≥ 0, but this follows from
the well-known argument:
Δ( s)= λ · s =⇒ λ ⟨ s, s ⟩VR = ⟨ s,Δ( s) ⟩VR = ⟨ ∂(s),∂(s) ⟩VR ≥ 0
248

— in Proposition 4.4 are formal consequences of (i.), (ii.), and (iii.). ⃝
We are now ready to prove the following result:
Theorem 4.5. The pull-back morphism
κ∗
R : Vn → VR
is injective, and its image is equal to the kernel of ∂
n
(as an operator on VR). In fact,
to apply ∂ to an element of the image of κ∗
R : Vn → VR corresponds to applying the
relative exterior diﬀerential operator (in the direction θ
∨
) of the morphism E† → E to
the corresponding element ofVn.I np a r t i c u l a r ,Ker(∂) ∼= V1 is a one-dimensional complex
vector space. If ζDR
0 ∈ Ker(∂) is nonzero, write
ζDR
n
def
= 1
n! · (∂
∗
)n(ζDR
0 )
if n> 0, ζDR
n
def
=0 if n< 0. Then for n ≥ 0, we have: C · ζDR
n =K e r ( Δ− n),a n d
ζDR
0 ,... ,ζDR
n form an orthogonal basis of Ker(∂
n+1
) such that ∂
∗
(ζDR
n )=( n +1 ) · ζDR
n+1;
∂(ζDR
n )=2 π · ζDR
n−1; ||ζDR
n ||2
VR = (2π)n
n! ·| |ζDR
0 ||2
VR .
Proof. That κ∗
R : Vn → VR is injective follows from the fact that if it were not, then
the image of κR would be contained inside a one-dimensional complex subvariety of E† ,
which is absurd (cf. the deﬁnition of κR in Chapter III, §3). The statement concerning
the correspondence between ∂ and the relative exterior diﬀerential operator for E† → E
follows immediately from the deﬁnitions (cf. also the discussion of Chapter III, §3).
To see that the image κ∗
R(Vn) is equal to Ker( ∂
n
), we reason as follows: First,
the statement concerning the relationship between ∂ and the relative exterior diﬀeren-
tial operator of E† → E implies that κ∗
R(Vn) ⊆ Ker(∂
n
). Thus, in particular, we see
that dimC(Ker(∂
n
)) ≥ n. On the other hand, one proves easily by induction on n that
dimC(Ker(∂
n
)) ≤ n: Indeed, this is clear if n = 1, since (by deﬁnition) Ker(∂)=Γ ( E, L).
If n ≥ 2, then note that ∂ deﬁnes a morphism Ker( ∂
n
) → Ker(∂
n−1
) whose kernel has
dimension ≤ 1. Thus, by the induction hypothesis, we conclude that dim C(Ker(∂
n
)) ≤
1+( n − 1) = n, as desired. This completes the proof that κ∗
R(Vn)=K e r (∂
n
).
That Δ( ζDR
n )= n · ζDR
n (for n ≥ 0) follows from Proposition 4.4, (iii.), induction on
n, and the fact that Δ(ζDR
0 ) = 0. If, for s ∈ VR,w eh a v eΔ (s)= n · s (for n ≥ 1), then by
Proposition 4.4, (ii.), Δ( ∂(s)) = (n − 1) · ∂(s). Thus, by induction on n, we obtain that
Δ( s)= n · s (for n ≥ 1) implies ∂
n
(s) ∈ Ker(Δ). But if Δ( t)=0 ,t h e n
249

⟨ ∂(t),∂(t) ⟩VR = ⟨ t,∂
∗
· ∂(t) ⟩VR = ⟨ t,Δ( t) ⟩VR =0
so ∂(t) = 0. Thus, in summary, Ker(Δ − n) ⊆ Ker(∂
n+1
). On the other hand, this im-
plies that ζDR
0 ,... ,ζDR
n (which are mutually orthogonal by Proposition 4.4, hence linearly
independent over C)a r e ∈ Ker(∂
n+1
), which (as we saw above) has dimension n +1 .
Thus, we conclude that ζDR
0 ,... ,ζDR
n form an orthogonal basis of Ker( ∂
n+1
), and that
Ker(Δ − n)= C · ζDR
n , as desired.
That ∂
∗
(ζDR
n )=( n +1 ) · ζDR
n+1 follows from the deﬁnitions. That ∂(ζDR
n )=2 π · ζDR
n−1
follows by computing (using Proposition 4.3):
∂(ζDR
n )= n−1 · ∂ · ∂
∗
(ζDR
n−1)=2 π · n−1 · (Δ + 1)(ζDR
n−1)=2 π · ζDR
n−1
Finally, ||ζDR
n ||2
VR = (2π)n
n! ·| |ζDR
0 ||2
VR follows by computing:
2π·n ·⟨ ζDR
n ,ζDR
n ⟩ =2 π·⟨ Δ( ζDR
n ),ζDR
n ⟩ = ⟨ ∂(ζDR
n ),∂(ζDR
n ) ⟩ =( 2π)2 ·⟨ ζDR
n−1,ζDR
n−1 ⟩
This completes the proof of Theorem 4.5. ⃝
We are now ready to analyze the relationship between the L2
DR-a n dL2
R-metrics:
Corollary 4.6. Let ζDR
n [TDR] ∈ Vn be the unique element such thatκ∗
R(ζDR
n [TDR]) = ζDR
n .
Then, relative to the above decomposition of R
E† ⊗OE OER ,w eh a v e :
ζDR
n [TDR]=
n∑
i=0
ζDR
i ·
((2π · TDR)n−i
(n − i)!
)
= ζDR
0 ·
((2π · TDR)n
n!
)
+ ζDR
1 ·
((2π · TDR)n−1
(n − 1)!
)
+...+ ζDR
n−1 · (2π · TDR)+ ζDR
n
In particular, ζDR
0 [TDR],ζDR
1 [TDR],... ,ζDR
n [TDR],... are mutually orthogonal with respect
to both the L2
DR-a n dL2
R-metrics, and their norms are given as follows: If we rescale the
metric on τE so that |TDR| = ρ ∈ R>0 (note that in the above discussion ρ=1 ), then
|| ζDR
n [TDR] ||L2
R
= ||ζDR
n ||VR =
((2π)n
n!
)1
2
·| |ζDR
0 ||VR
250

|| ζDR
n [TDR] ||L2
DR
=
{ n∑
i=0
((2π · ρ)n−i
(n − i)!
)2
·
((2π)i
i!
)}1
2
·| |ζDR
0 ||VR
= || ζDR
n [TDR] ||L2
R
·
{ n∑
i=0
(n
i
) ((2π · ρ2)i
i!
)}1
2
= || ζDR
n [TDR] ||L2
R
· Cn(ρ)
where 1 ≤ Cn(ρ) ≤ eπ · 2
n
2 · Max(1,ρn).
Proof. Let us ﬁrst show that
ζDR
n [TDR]= ζDR
0 ·
((2π · TDR)n
n!
)
+ ζDR
1 ·
((2π · TDR)n−1
(n − 1)!
)
+...+ ζDR
n−1 · (2π · TDR)+ ζDR
n
We use induction on n. The result is clear for n = 0, so assume the result known for
“ n − 1.” The fact that the constant term of ζDR
n [TDR]i s ζDR
n follows from the deﬁnition
of ζDR
n [TDR]. Thus, to prove the above equality, it suﬃces to prove it after applying
∂
∂TDR
. Since applying ∂
∂TDR
corresponds (relative to pull-back viaκ∗
R) to applying ∂ to the
corresponding element of VR (cf. Theorem 4.5), it follows (since ∂(ζDR
n )=2 π · ζDR
n−1 by
Theorem 4.5) that it suﬃces to show that
2π·ζDR
n−1[TDR]= ζDR
0 ·
(2π · (2π · TDR)n−1
(n − 1)!
)
+ζDR
1 ·
(2π · (2π · TDR)n−2
(n − 2)!
)
+...+ ζDR
n−1 ·(2π)
But this follows from the induction hypothesis. This completes the computation of the
components of ζDR
n [TDR].
The statement concerning orthogonality then follows from the statement concerning
the orthogonality of theζDR
n ’s in Theorem 4.5. The computation of the norms also follows
from the norm computation of Theorem 4.5 (together with the elementary facts that(n
i
)
≤ 2n, ∑n
i=0
xi
i! ≤ ex for x ≥ 0). ⃝
Remark 1. One can regard the results of Corollary 4.6 as the computation of the analytic
torsion of Vn
def
=Γ (E, L⊗ OE Fn(R
E† )). If there were “no analytic torsion,” then the norm
of ζDR
n [TDR] would go roughly as the norm of its “leading term,” i.e., roughly as
(2π)n
n!
251

not as ((2π)n
n! )
1
2 (as in Corollary 4.6).
Remark 2. The reader may already have noticed many formal similarities between Theorem
4.5, Corollary 4.6 above and Chapter III, Theorem 7.4. These similarities are by no means
an accident. In §5 below, we will discuss the relationship between the theory of the present
§ and the theory of the canonical Schottky-Weierstrass functions of Chapter III, §7.
Remark 3. Just as in Chapter III, Remark 3 (following Chapter III, Theorem 7.4), one
c a ng i v eam o r e“generating function-theoretic” formulation of the Corollary 4.6 as follows:
Let s be an indeterminate. Let us write
∂
E† for the “ ∂-operator” acting on real analytic
sections of the holomorphic line bundle L over E†
R. Thus, we may regard ∂
E† as an
operator on
LR[TDR]
If we write ∂, ∂
∗
for the operators obtained on LR[TDR]b y acting on the coeﬃcients,t h e n
one computes easily that
∂
E† = ∂ − ∂
∂TDR
hence that
[ ∂
E† , ∂
∗
+2 π · TDR ]=[ ∂, ∂
∗
] − [ ∂
∂TDR
, 2π · TDR ]=2 π − 2π =0
(by Proposition 4.3). Thus, since (∂
E† )(ζDR
0 )=0 , ∂
E† also annihilates
e(∂
∗
+2π·TDR)·s · ζDR
0 =
∑
n≥0
( n∑
i=0
ζDR
i · (2π · TDR)n−i
(n − i)!
)
· sn
= ζDR
0 [TDR]+ ζDR
1 [TDR] · s + ζDR
2 [TDR] · s2 +...+ ζDR
n [TDR] · sn
+...
The coeﬃcients of this series are precisely the functions discussed in Corollary 4.6. The
norms computed in Corollary 4.6 may also be computed directly from these exponential
expressions. We leave this as an exercise for the reader.
252

§5. The Relationship Between de Rham and
Canonical Schottky-Weierstrass Zeta Functions
In this §, we study the relationship between the canonical Schottky-Weierstrass(“SW
” for short) zeta functions of Chapter III, §7, and the de Rham (“DR” for short) zeta
functions of §4 (i.e., the ζDR
n ’s). In a word, the combinatorics of this relationship are
described by the Hermite polynomials (cf. Proposition 2.2). Using the well-known explicit
form of the Hermite polynomials, we give explicit equations relating the two types of zeta
functions, and use these equations to bound the norm of the canonical SW zeta functions
in terms of the L
2
DR-metric (of §4). One way to think about the material of the present §
is to regard it as corresponding to the usualHodge comparison theorem(i.e., the “de Rham
isomorphism” between de Rham cohomology and singular cohomology – cf. Chapter VIII,
§1) over C, expressed at the level of diﬀerential operators, i.e.,
as the relationship between the “de Rham-theoretic” operators
∂,∂
∗
of
§4, which correspond to diﬀerentiation in the direction of the Hodge
ﬁltration and its complex conjugate, and the operator δ∗ of Chapter III,
§7, which corresponds to diﬀerentiation along a topological cycle of the
elliptic curve.
This relationship between diﬀerential operators is expressed at the function-theoretic level
as the relationship between the DR zeta functions of§4 and the canonical SW zeta functions
of Chapter III, §7.
We continue with the notation of§4. Thus, E is an elliptic curve over C. Recall from
the discussion of Chapter III, §3, that one has a natural isomorphism – called thede Rham
isomorphism –
H1
DR(E, OE) ∼= H1
sing(E, 2πi · R) ⊗R C =Λ ⊗Z C
(where Λ
def
= H1
sing(E, 2πi·Z)) of complex vector spaces. The left-hand side of this isomor-
phism, i.e., H1
DR(E, OE), may be regarded as the tangent space to the universal extension
E† , and thus admits a natural surjection H1
DR(E, OE) → τE arising from the projection
E† → E. Note that since the right-hand side of this isomorphismH1
sing(E, 2πi ·C)a d m i t s
a natural real structure(given by ΛR
def
=Λ ⊗Z R), it follows that the isomorphism induces
on H1
DR(E, OE)an a t u r a lcomplex conjugation automorphism. If we use this automor-
phism to conjugate the projectionH1
DR(E, OE) → τE, we thus obtain a natural direct sum
decomposition:
H1
DR(E, OE)= τE ⊕ τc
E
(where τc
E is the complex conjugate C-vector space to τE). Note that here we use the
notation “ τc
E” rather than τE because we wish to think of τc
E here as a “ holomorphic
253

dimension” (which just happens to be isomorphic to the complex conjugate ofτE), not as
an “anti-holomorphic dimension” (which is the interpretation most commonly given to a
“bar,” as in
τE).
Next, suppose that we are given a rank one Z-submodule
Λ1 ⊆ Λ
(cf. Chapter III, §3, the discussion of the “ Gm-splitting”). Choose a generator λ1 ∈ Λ1.
Then there exists a unique isomorphism of τE with C relative to which E may be written
in the form
E = C/ ⟨ 1,τ ⟩ = C×/qZ
where the “1” corresponds to λ1, q
def
= e2πiτ,a n dI m (τ) > 0. Relative to the de Rham
isomorphism and the direct sum decomposition of H1
DR(E, OE) discussed above, λ1 corre-
sponds to some element
(v,u · vc) ∈ τE ⊕ τc
E = H1
DR(E, OE)
where vc is the element of τc
E deﬁned by v; u ∈ C satisﬁes |u| = 1. Moreover, the length
of v (relative to the metric || ∼ || τ)o f §4) may be computed as follows:
Lemma 5.1. If λ1 corresponds under the de Rham isomorphism to (v,u · vc) (where
u ∈ C satisﬁes |u| =1 ), then the length of v is given by:
||v||τ = 1
{8π2 · Im(τ)}
1
2
Proof. Let us think of E as C/ ⟨ 1,τ ⟩ = C×/qZ,a n dw r i t ez (respectively, U)f o r
the standard coordinate on C (respectively, C×). Thus, U =e x p ( 2πiz). Moreover, the
diﬀerential corresponding toλ1 ∈ Λ1 is given by d log(U)
def
= dU
U =2 πi ·dz.T h a ti st os a y ,
||v||−1
τ = ||d log(U)||ω =2 π ·| |dz||ω. Moreover, the deﬁnition of || ∼ || ω is such that
||dz||2
ω
def
=
⏐⏐⏐
∫
E
dz ∧ dz
⏐⏐⏐ =2 · Im(τ)
as desired. ⃝
Now we would like to considerthe relationship between the canonical SW zeta functions
of Chapter III, §7, and the DR zeta functions introduced in §4. To avoid confusion, let
254

us denote the indeterminate “ T” of Chapter III, §7, by TSW. Thus, we would like to
investigate the relationship betweenζPD
n [TSW] (cf. Chapter III, Theorem 7.4) andζDR
n [TDR]
(Corollary 4.6). It follows immediately from the deﬁnitions that this essentially amounts
to investigating the relationship between the diﬀerential operators:
∂
∗
+ TDR and δ∗ + TSW
(where δ∗ is as in Chapter III, §7). This relationship may be described as follows:
Lemma 5.2. As operators on the holomorphic sections of L over E† , the above two
operators are related as follows:
L · (∂
∗
+ u · ∂+ TDR)= δ∗ + TSW
for some u, L ∈ C,w h e r e|u| =1 , |L| = {8π2 · Im(τ)}− 1
2 .
Proof. Note that δ∗+ TSW is (by deﬁnition) the tautological connection on L|
E† applied
in the direction ( d log(U))∨. Put another way, this operator is the operator given by
diﬀerentiation in the direction deﬁned by λ1 ∈ Λ1 ⊆ ΛC ∼= H1
DR(E, OE) (where we regard
H1
DR(E, OE) as the tangent space to E† ). By deﬁnition, the tangent space to ER ⊆ E† is
given by Λ ⊗ R ↪→ H1
DR(E, OE). Thus, it follows that this tangent direction is contained
inside the real analytic submanifold ER ⊆ E† deﬁned by the section κR. Moreover, since
λ1 corresponds to (v,u ·vc) under the de Rham isomorphism, diﬀerentiation in this tangent
direction on ER is given by the operator L · (∂
∗
+ u · ∂), for some L, u as in the statement
of Lemma 5.2. Note that here, L is deﬁned by the relation L · θ=( d log(U))∨. Similarly,
relative to the decomposition of E† induced by κR, the tautological connection (applied
in the tangent direction in question) at points of E† with relative coordinate (i.e., the
coordinate of E† over E) TDR is given by adding to the connection at the section κR the
quantity “TDR times (d log(U))∨
θ .” But this quantity is simply L · TDR, as desired. ⃝
Remark. Note that the equality of operators in Lemma 5.2 does not necessarily hold when
applied to arbitrary real analytic sections of L over E† . Indeed, roughly speaking, the
operator on the right-hand side of the formula in Lemma 5.2 is the “holomorphic portion”
of the operator on the left-hand side of this formula.
We are now ready tocompute the precise relationship betweenζ
PD
n [TSW] and ζDR
n [TDR].
It turns out that the combinatorics of this relationship are described by the Hermite poly-
nomials (cf. Proposition 2.2).
Let us begin by observing ﬁrst of all that bothζPD
n [TSW]a n dζDR
n [TDR]a r eholomorphic
(hence, in particular, real analytic) sections of the line bundle L over E† .T h u s ,i tm a k e s
255

sense to compare them. Here, by ζPD
n [TSW]w em e a nt h ecomplex analytic version of
the canonical Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functions (cf. Chapter III, Remark 1 following
Theorem 7.4). That is to say, these functions are the functions obtained by regarding the
(clearly convergent – since diﬀerentiation does not eﬀect convergence) formal series inq of
Chapter III, §7, as holomorphic functions of q = e
2πiτ (where the family of elliptic curves
in question is given by C×/qZ,a n dτ ∈ H
def
= {τ ∈ C | Im(τ) > 0}.
Theorem 5.3. Let n ≥ 0 be an integer. Choose ζDR
0 ,ζPD
0 to be the same section ζ0 ∈
Γ(E, L). Then we have the following equality of holomorphic (hence, in particular, real
analytic) sections of L over E† :
ζPD
n [TSW]
def
= 1
n! · (δ∗ + TSW)n(ζPD
0 )= Ln ·
[n/2]∑
m=0
(π · u)m · (∂
∗
+ TDR)n−2m(ζDR
0 )
m!( n − 2m)!
= Ln ·
[n/2]∑
m=0
(π · u)m
m! · ζDR
n−2m[TDR]
where u, L ∈ C satisfy |u| =1 , |L| = {8π2 · Im(τ)}− 1
2 .
Similarly,
ζDR
n [TDR]
def
= 1
n! · (∂
∗
+ TDR)n(ζDR
0 )=
[n/2]∑
m=0
(−π · u)m · (δ∗ + TSW)n−2m(ζPD
0 )
Ln−2m · m!( n − 2m)!
=
[n/2]∑
m=0
(−π · u)m
Ln−2m · m! · ζPD
n−2m[TSW]
Proof. Indeed, the ﬁrst formula follows immediately by applying the identity
(A + B)n · v = n! ·
[n/2]∑
m=0
(c/2)m · Bn−2m
m!( n − 2m)! · v
(cf. Remark 1 following Proposition 2.2) with A
def
= u ·∂ and B
def
= ∂
∗
+TDR (which satisfy
A(ζ0)= u · ∂(ζ0)=0a n d[ A, B]= u · [∂,∂
∗
]=2 π · u (by Proposition 4.3)) to compute
1
n! · (∂
∗
+ u · ∂+ TDR)n(ζDR
0 )= L−n · 1
n! · (δ∗ + TSW)n(ζPD
0 )= L−n · ζPD
n [TSW]
(where the ﬁrst equality follows from Lemma 5.2).
256

The second formula follows similarly, by letting A
def
= −u · ∂, B
def
= L−1 · (δ∗ + TSW).
Thus, A + B = ∂
∗
+ TDR (cf. Lemma 5.2), [ A, B]= −2π · u (cf. Proposition 4.3). Note
that Lemma 5.2 applies here since the operator ∂ (as we have deﬁned it here) maps all
of the holomorphic sections of L (over E† ) in question to holomorphic sections of L (over
E† ). Indeed, this may be veriﬁed immediately by applying ∂ to the expression on the
right-hand side of the ﬁrst formula of Corollary 4.6 (cf. also the proof of Corollary 4.6).
⃝
Corollary 5.4. Let n ≥ 0 be an integer. Choose ζ
DR
0 ,ζPD
0 to be the same section
ζ0 ∈ Γ(E, L).T h e ni fw erescale the metric on τE so that |TDR| = ρ ∈ R>0 (note that in
the above discussion ρ=1 ; cf. Corollary 4.6), then
|| n! · ζPD
n [TSW] ||L2
DR
≤| |ζ0||L2
DR
· eπ · Max(1,ρn) ·
(8π · n
Im(τ)
)n
2
Proof. We compute, using Theorem 5.3 and Corollary 4.6:
|| n! · ζPD
n [TSW] ||L2
DR
≤| n
1
2 · L|n · πn ·
[n/2]∑
m=0
n!
n
n
2 · (m!) ·| | ζDR
n−2m[TDR] ||L2
DR
≤
( n
8π2 · Im(τ)
)n
2
· (2 · π2 · 2π)
n
2 · eπ · Max(1,ρn) ·| | ζ0 ||L2
DR
·
[n/2]∑
m=0
( n! · n!
nn · (m!)2 · (n − 2m)!
)1
2
≤
( n
Im(τ)
)n
2
· (π/2)
n
2 · eπ · Max(1,ρn) ·| | ζ0 ||L2
DR
·
[n/2]∑
m=0
( n!
(m!)2 · (n − 2m)!
)1
2
≤
( n
Im(τ)
)n
2
· (π/2)
n
2 · eπ · Max(1,ρn) ·| | ζ0 ||L2
DR
· 3n
≤| | ζ0 ||L2
DR
· eπ · Max(1,ρn) ·
( 8π · n
Im(τ)
)n
2
as desired. ⃝
257

§6. Diﬀerential Calculus on the Theta-Weighted Circle
In this §, we commence our study of the function theory of canonical SW zeta func-
tions. We begin by giving various estimates (which will be useful to us in Chapter VIII,
as well as in the present§)o ft h ecoeﬃcients of the q-expansions of several types of canon-
ical SW zeta functions (Lemmas 6.1, 6.2). Next, we introduce what we call orthogonal
canonical SW zeta functions. This new type of canonical SW zeta function is obtained by
applying the orthogonalization process discussed in §1 (cf., especially, Example (4)) to (a
slight variant of) the divided power canonical SW zeta functions of Chapter III, Theorem
7.4, and Chapter IV, Theorem 3.2. Certain limits (in which the scaling factor has slope 1
2
– cf. the discussion surrounding “Terminology 3.7”) of the orthogonal SW zeta functions
give rise to canonical SW zeta functions based on theHermite polynomials (Theorem 6.7).
Finally, we relate this fact to the discussion of §5 (which may be summarized as stating
that the de Rham zeta functions are essentially Hermite polynomial-based canonical SW
zeta functions).
Write
A
def
= C{{qsc}}
(i.e., convergent series in qsc). In fact, in this §, we shall think of qsc =e x p ( 2πiτsc)a s
a complex variable on the unit disc |qsc| < 1, i.e., τsc ∈ H
def
= {z ∈ C | Im(z) > 0}.
Let S
def
=S p e c (A) (cf. the notation of Chapter IV, §2,3). We would like to think of qsc
as the q-parameter associated to the elliptic curve ˜E of Chapter IV, §2,3. Thus, qsc is
equal to “ qn” in the notation of Chapter IV, §2,3. In the following, we shall write qcv
(where “cv” stands for “covering”) for the “ q” of Chapter IV, §2,3. Thus, in the present
complex analytic context, the elliptic curve “ E” (respectively, “ ˜E”) of Chapter IV, §2,3,
corresponds to Ecv
def
= Gm/qZ
cv (respectively, Esc
def
= Gm/qZ
sc). Also, we shall write Ucv
for the standard multiplicative coordinate on the copy ( Gm)cv of Gm which uniformizes
Ecv =( Gm)cv/qZ
cv,a n dUsc for the multiplicative coordinate on the copy ( Gm)sc of Gm
which uniformizes Esc
def
=( Gm)sc/qZ
sc.T h u s ,
Usc = Un
cv; qsc = qn
cv
and Esc = Ecv/μn.
Fix a character
χ ∈ Hom(Πn,(μn)S)
as in Chapter IV, Theorem 3.2, where n =2 m ∈ 2Z.L e t σχ ∈ Γ(C∞
ˆS
,(L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
)χ), iχ ∈
{−m, −m +1 ,... ,m − 1} be as in Chapter V, Theorem 4.8. Note that the action of
258

Zet × μn on (L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
)χ is compatible with the Galois action of Zet × μn on C∞
ˆS
, regarded as
a covering space of the elliptic curve ˜E of Chapter IV, §2,3. Thus, if we descend and then
translate into the complex analytic language of the present section, we obtain a natural
line bundle
L
χ
sc
of degree 1 on Esc. Note that the section “ θm” may then be thought of as a section of the
line bundle Lχ
sc over the cover
(Gm)cv → (Gm)sc → Esc
(where (Gm)cv → (Gm)sc is the map Ucv ↦→ Usc = Un
cv). Thus, if we divide the series for
σχ in Chapter V, Theorem 4.8, by θm, we obtain the (twisted) theta function Θχ:
∑
k∈Z
q
1
2 ·k2+(iχ /n)·k
sc · U2mk+iχ
cv · χ(ket)=
∑
k∈Z
q
1
d (1
2 ·k2+(iχ /n)·k)
or · U2mk+iχ
cv · χ(ket)
where qor
def
= qd
sc,a n dd is a ﬁxed positive integer.( W es h a l la l s ow r i t eτor
def
= d · τsc.) The
point of introducing these two “q’s” (i.e.,qsc and qor) is that we want to think of ourselves
as being interested in degree d line bundles on the elliptic curve Eor
def
= Gm/qZ
or. To study
such bundles, it is convenient to take invariants with respect to “Zet/d” (cf. Chapter IV,
Theorem 1.4) and work with degree d line bundles on the quotient Eor/(Zet/d)= Esc.
Thus, we would like to think of thed as a scaling factor.T h a ti st os a y ,qor is our “original
q,” while qsc is our “scaled q.”
Recall the diﬀerential operatorδ∗ of Chapter IV, Theorem 3.2. This operator satisﬁes
δ∗(UN
cv)= N · Un·N
cv (for N ∈ Z). Let us deﬁne the “ χ-shifted operator”
δ∗
χ
def
= δ∗ − iχ
n
Thus,
δ∗
χ(Un·N+iχ
cv )= N · Un·N+iχ
cv
(for N ∈ Z). Our ﬁrst goal in this § is to bound the coeﬃcients in the expansion of the
“shifted and scaled monomial” canonical SW zeta functions
ζSS
r · θ−m def
=
(δ∗
χ
d
)r
(Θχ)=
∑
k∈Z
(k
d
)r
· q
1
d (1
2 ·k2+(iχ /n)·k)
or · U2mk+iχ
cv · χ(ket)
259

(where r is a nonnegative integer).
Lemma 6.1. Let a be a positive integer. Then the coeﬃcient CSS
k of U2mk+iχ
cv in ζSS
r
satisﬁes the following:
(1) If |k|≤ a · d,t h e n|CSS
k |≤ e− π
d ·Im(τor)·(k2+(iχ /m)·k) · ar ≤ ar.
(2) Let ϵ> 0 be a real number. If |k|≥ Max(1+ϵ
ϵ ,a · d), r ≤ d,a n d
a ≥ 1
2 · (b +1 ) · Q−1,w h e r eb ∈ R≥1,a n d
Q
def
= π
2(1 +ϵ) · Im(τor)
then |CSS
k |≤ e−b·|k|. In particular, in this case, we have:
∞∑
|k|=a·d
|CSS
k |≤ 4 · e−a·b·d;
∞∑
|k|=a·d
|CSS
k |2 ≤ 4 · e−2a·b·d
Proof. The estimates of (1) follow immediately from the facts that|qor|≤ 1; |k|≤ a·d =⇒
(|k|/d)r ≤ ar.
The estimates of (2) are obtained as follows: First, we observe that since |k|≥ a · d,
|k|≥ 1+ϵ
ϵ (so k2 −| k|≥ 1
1+ϵ · k2), r ≤ d,a n da · Q ≥ 1
2 · (b +1 ) ,
log(|CSS
k |)= r · log(|k|/d) − 2π · Im(τor) · 1
2d(k2 +( 2 · iχ/n) · k)
≤ r · log(|k|/r) − 2π · Im(τor) · 1
2d(k2 −| k|)
≤| k|− 2π · Im(τor) · k2
2d(1 +ϵ)
= |k|− 2Q · (|k|/d) ·| k|
≤| k|− 2Q · a ·| k|
≤− b ·| k|
(where in the third line, we use Lemma 3.6), as desired. The inequalities concerning the
sums then follow immediately. Note that here we use the facts that
260

∞∑
k=0
e−k =( 1 − e−1)−1 ≤ 2;
∞∑
k=0
e−2k =( 1 − e−2)−1 ≤ 2
(which follow from e2 ≥ e ≥ 2). ⃝
Next, although it will not be logically necessary in the following discussion, we observe
that the estimates of Lemma 6.1 allow us to estimate the coeﬃcients of the congruence
canonical SW zeta functions of Chapter V, Theorem 4.8(cf. Chapter VIII, §3,4,5, for more
details on the archimedean properties of these functions):
Lemma 6.2. The coeﬃcient CCG[r]k of U2mk+iχ
cv in the series
ζCG
r · θ−m =
(δ∗
χ + λr
r
)
(Θχ)=
∑
k∈Z
(k + λr
r
)
· q
1
2 ·k2+(iχ /n)·k
sc · U2mk+iχ
cv · χ(ket)
of Chapter V, Theorem 4.8, satisﬁes the following:
(1) If |k|≤ a · d,t h e n|CCG[r]k|≤ ar · e3r ·
(
d
r
)r
≤ ar · e3r+d.
(2) Let ϵ> 0 be a real number. If |k|≥ Max(1+ϵ
ϵ ,a · d), 1 ≤ r ≤ d,a n d
a ≥ 1
2 · (b +5 ) · Q−1,w h e r eb ∈ R≥1,a n d
Q
def
= π
2(1 +ϵ) · Im(τor)
then |CCG[r]k|≤ e−(b+1)·|k| ·
(
d
r
)r
≤ e−b·|k|. In particular, in this case,
we have:
∞∑
|k|=a·d
|CCG[r]k |≤ 4 · e−a·b·d;
∞∑
|k|=a·d
|CCG[r]k|2 ≤ 4 · e−2a·b·d
Proof. To apply Lemma 6.1, it suﬃces to estimate the coeﬃcients of the polynomial(T+λr
r
)
in terms of ( T/d)i. One sees easily (since |λr |≤ r
2 ;f o r N =0 ,1,... ,r − 1,
261

|− N +λr |≤ r) that the estimates of Proposition 3.3 for the coeﬃcients of the polynomial(T
r
)
also hold for
(T+λr
r
)
(by the same proof as that given for Proposition 3.3). Thus, these
coeﬃcients may be bounded by e2r ·
(
d
r
)r
≤ e2r+d. Since there are a total of r +1 ≤ er
terms to contend with, we thus see that in order to get estimates for CCG[r]k, it suﬃces
to multiply the estimates for CSS
k in Lemma 6.1 by e3r ·
(
d
r
)r
≤ e3r+d. This takes care
of (1). For (2), we note further that if we take the “ b” of Lemma 6.1 to be b +4( i nt h e
notation of the present Corollary), then using r ≤ d ≤ a · d ≤| k|, we obtain
|CCG[r]k|≤ e−(b+4)·|k|+3r ·
(d
r
)r
≤ e−(b+4)·|k|+3·|k| ·
(d
r
)r
≤ e−(b+1)·|k| ·
(d
r
)r
≤ e−(b+1)·|k|+d ≤ e−(b+1)·|k|+|k| = e−b·|k|
as desired. ⃝
Next, we would like to introduce the orthogonal canonical SW zeta functions, as fol-
lows. First, in the following discussion, we would like to restrict the variable Ucv ∈ C×
to the unit circle; we shall write Ucv|(S1)cv =e x p ( 2πitcv)( w h e r etcv ∈ [0,2π)) for this
restricted Ucv. Then observe that Θ χ |(S1)cv is a smooth function on (S1)cv (varying with
the parameter q). Recall that L2((S1)cv) is equipped with a natural inner product given
by
(f,g )
def
= 1
2π ·
∫
(S1)cv
f · g · dt
Now we would like to apply the theory of§1, especially Example (4). That is to say, we take
H
def
= L2((S1)cv), X
def
= δ∗,a n d( f o rr ≥ 0) Fr(H) to be the complex vector subspace of H
generated by functions of the form P(δ∗
χ) · Θχ,w h e r eP(−) is a polynomial (with complex
coeﬃcients) of degree ≤ r. Put another way, we would like to consider the ( C-)linear
combinations of the “standard monomial” canonical SW zeta functions
ζSM
r · θ−m def
=
(
δ∗
)r
(Θχ)=
∑
k∈Z
(k + iχ
n )r · q
1
d (1
2 ·k2+(iχ /n)·k)
or · U2mk+iχ
cv · χ(ket)
= q
− 1
2 ·(iχ /n)2
sc ·
∑
kχ ∈ Z+
iχ
n
kr
χ · q
1
2 k2
χ
sc · Ukχ
sc · χ((kχ − iχ
n )et)
= q
− 1
2d ·(iχ /n)2
or ·
∑
kχ ∈ Z+
iχ
n
kr
χ · q
1
2d k2
χ
or · Ukχ
sc · χ((kχ − iχ
n )et)
262

(where Usc
def
= Un
cv) whose restrictions to (S1)cv are orthonormal with respect to the inner
product just deﬁned on L2((S1)cv). If we normalize the orthonormal system that we deal
with by assuming that the leading coeﬃcient (i.e., the coeﬃcient of ζSM
r ) in the degree
r member of this system is a positive real number, then we see that we obtain uniquely
deﬁned functions
ζOR,S1
0 ,... ,ζOR,S1
r ,...
(for r ≥ 0). Because these functions are a sort of prototype of the orthogonal functions
that we will consider in Chapter VIII(cf., especially, §2), we give them a name:
Deﬁnition 6.3. We refer to theζOR,S1
r as the orthogonal canonical Schottky-Weierstrass
zeta functions.
Note that it follows from the general theory of §1 (e.g., Proposition 1.2) that the ζOR,S1
r
are completely determined by their means and principal submeans.
In the following discussion, we would like to consider the trivialization θm of the line
bundle Lχ
sc over the covering (Gm)cv → (Gm)sc → Esc,w h e r e(Gm)cv → (Gm)sc is the
map Ucv ↦→ Usc = Un
cv. Note that this line bundle Lχ
sc on the elliptic curve Esc admits
a unique (up to a positive real multiple) metric with translation-invariant curvature (cf.
the discussion of the metric || ∼ || L in §4). This metric thus deﬁnes a function ||θm|| of
Ucv. For simplicity, let us assume that our metric has been normalized so that ||θm|| =1
at Ucv =1 . Note that since the natural action of μ∞ on “ L⊗n
C∞
ˆS
” (cf. the discussion at the
beginning of Chapter IV, §2) ﬁxes θm (as well as the metric || ∼ || ), we thus see that||θm||
is invariant under translation by elements of (S1)cv. In particular, it follows that we may
regard ||θm|| as a function of Usc.
Lemma 6.4. At Usc = qρ
sc · exp(2πitcv) (where tcv ∈ [0,2π), ρ ∈ R≥0), we have
||θm|| = |qsc|
1
2 ·ρ2
Proof. First, observe that the sectionθm (of the line bundle Lχ
sc over the cover (Gm)cv →
(Gm)sc → Esc)i s nonzero for all values of Ucv ∈ C× (i.e., it really is a “trivialization”).
Indeed, this follows, for instance, from the fact that the holomorphic connection deﬁned by
θis regular(i.e., has no poles) for allU
cv ∈ C× (cf. Chapter III, Theorem 5.6), which would
not be the case if θ had zeroes. Thus, θm constitutes a trivialization of the line bundle in
question at all values ofUcv ∈ C×. In particular, since the curvature of the metric that we
are using is translation-invariant (i.e., “constant”), it follows that theLaplacian ∂2
∂ρ2 + ∂2
∂t2
263

of the function φ(ρ, t)
def
= log( ||θm||)( w h e r eUsc = qρ
sc · exp(2πitcv)) is constant.S i n c e
φ(ρ, t)= φ(ρ) is independent of tcv, we thus obtain that d2φ
dρ2 is constant. But this implies
that φ(ρ)i sa quadratic function of ρ, hence determined as soon as it is determined for
Usc = qZ
sc, i.e., for Ucv = qZ
cv. Thus, it suﬃces to prove Lemma 6.4 for such values of Usc.
But for Ucv = qN
cv, we may calculate||θm|| as the value of||Net(θm)|| = ||qm·N2
cv ·Un·N
cv ·θm||
at Ucv = 1, which is just |qcv|m·N2
= |qsc|
1
2 ·N2
, as desired (since Ucv = qN
cv corresponds to
Usc = qN
sc ). This completes the proof. ⃝
Now that we have computed the absolute value of our trivializationθm, we would like
compute various L2-norms of canonical zeta functions as follows. First, let
P(s)
be a polynomial with complex coeﬃcients in the indeterminate s. Then let us write
ζP [T]·θ−m def
= P(δ∗+T)·(Θχ)= q
− 1
2 ·(iχ /n)2
sc ·
∑
kχ ∈ Z+
iχ
n
P(kχ+T)·q
1
2 k2
χ
sc ·Ukχ
sc ·χ((kχ − iχ
n )et)
(where the indeterminate “ T” is as in Chapter IV, §3). We would like to consider the
value of this zeta function at Ucv = qρ
cv · exp(2πitcv)( w h e r etcv ∈ [0,2π), ρ ∈ R≥0), i.e.,
Usc = Un
cv = qρ
sc · exp(2πitcv · n). Since at this value of Ucv, the indeterminate T takes on
the value ρ(cf. Chapter III, Corollary 5.9, for rational ρ;s i n c eT is a continuous function,
we thus obtain the result for arbitrary real ρ). Thus,
ζP [T]·θ−m|U=qρ
cv ·exp(2πitcv) = q
− 1
2 ·(iχ /n)2
sc ·
∑
kχ ∈ Z+
iχ
n
P(kχ + ρ) · q
1
2 k2
χ +kχ ·ρ
sc · exp(2πitcv · n · kχ) · χ((kχ − iχ
n )et)
In particular, by applying Lemma 6.4, for Ucv = qρ
cv · exp(2πitcv), we obtain:
||ζP [T]|| = |qsc|− 1
2 ·(iχ /n)2+1
2 ·ρ2
·
⏐⏐⏐
∑
kχ ∈ Z+
iχ
n
P(kχ + ρ) · q
1
2 k2
χ +kχ ·ρ
sc · exp(2πitcv · n · kχ) · χ((kχ − iχ
n )et)
⏐⏐⏐
= |qsc|− 1
2 ·(iχ /n)2
·
⏐⏐⏐
∑
kχ,ρ ∈ Z+ρ+
iχ
n
P(kχ,ρ) · q
1
2 k2
χ,ρ
sc · exp(2πitcv · n · kχ,ρ) · χ((kχ,ρ − ρ− iχ
n )et)
⏐⏐⏐
264

Thus, by squaring and integrating over (S1)cv, we obtain the following:
Lemma 6.5. Write Ucv = qρ
cv ·exp(2πitcv),w h e r ew eﬁ xρ,a n dl e texp(2πitcv) ∈ (S1)cv
vary. Then for |Ucv| = |qcv|ρ,w eh a v e :
||ζP [T]||2
L2((S1)cv) = |qsc|−(iχ /n)2
·
∑
kχ,ρ ∈ Z+ρ+
iχ
n
|P(kχ,ρ)|2 ·| qsc|k2
χ,ρ
If, moreover, we integrate theseL2((S1)cv) norms as ρ ranges from 0 to 1,w eo b t a i n :
||ζP [T]||2
L2(Esc) = |qsc|−(iχ /n)2
·
∫
kχ ∈ R+
iχ
n
|P(kχ)|2 ·| qsc|k2
χ · dkχ
= e
2π
d ·Im(τor)·(iχ /n)2
·
∫
R
|P(k)|2 · e− 2π
d ·Im(τor)·k2
· dk
(where the L2-norm L2(Esc) is deﬁned by integrating the L2((S1)cv) norms as a function
of ρ,w h e r eρ ranges from 0 to 1).
Next, we would like to see what happens if wereplace (S1)cv in the above discussion by
μd.L e tu sw r i t etsc
def
= n ·tcv,a n dt h i n ko fμd ⊆ (S1)sc as a subset of the circle (S1)sc with
coordinate exp(2πitsc). Then by restricting ζP to μd and dividing by a(n) (unnecessary)
factor of exp(2πi · iχ · tcv) · θm, we obtain
ζP,μd def
=e x p (−2πi · iχ · tcv) · θ−m · P(δ∗) · (Θχ)|μd
= q
− 1
2 ·(iχ /n)2
sc ·
∑
kmod ∈Z/dZ
exp(2πitsc · kmod) ·
∑
kχ ∈ kmod+
iχ
n
P(kχ) · q
1
2 k2
χ
sc
· χ((kχ − iχ
n )et)
Let us deﬁne the inner product on L2(μd)b y
(f,g )
def
= 1
d ·
∑
α∈μd
f(α) · g(α)
Note that, just as in Lemma 6.5, we have:
||ζP,μd ||2
L2(μd) = |qsc|−(iχ /n)2
·
∑
kmod ∈Z/dZ
⏐⏐⏐
∑
kχ ∈ kmod+
iχ
n
P(kχ) · q
1
2 k2
χ
sc · χ((kχ − iχ
n )et)
⏐⏐⏐
2
265

Now assume (just for this discussion of functions on μd) that iχ ̸= 0. By Chapter VI,
Theorem 3.1, (2), this assumption implies that as P(−) ranges over the polynomials of
degree <d , the resulting ζP,μd form a basis of L2(μd). Thus, we may orthonormalize
these ζP,μd ’s to obtain
ζOR,μ
0 ,... ,ζOR,μ
d−1
Deﬁnition 6.6. We refer to theζOR,μ
r as the μd-orthogonal canonical Schottky-Weierstrass
zeta functions.
We are now ready to state the main result of this §: First, let us write Lχ
sc|(S1)cv
for the restriction of Lχ
sc to the circle ( S1)cv ⊆ (Gm)cv which is parametrized by Ucv.
Note that this bundle Lχ
sc|(S1)cv over (S1)cv admits a natural trivialization deﬁned by
θm. In the following theorem, we would like to consider the analogue for the line bundle
Lχ
sc on Esc of the real analytic sections ζDR
r of §4, 5, of the line bundle associated to
the origin of an elliptic curve. Since the pair ( Esc, Lχ
sc)i s isomorphic (by translation) to
the pair (Esc, OEsc (eEsc )) (where eEsc is the origin of E), we thus see that, by transport of
structure, the theory of §4,5, also applies to the pair(Esc, Lχ
sc). Thus, by abuse of notation,
we denote byζDR
r the resulting real analytic section ofLχ
sc on Esc (associated to the choice
of ζDR
0 deﬁned by σχ). The following theorem concerns the restriction ζDR
r |(S1)cv of ζDR
r
to (S1)cv ⊆ (Gm)cv.
Theorem 6.7. Let r ≥ 0 be an integer. Let us ﬁx qor, and consider d ≥ 1 as variable.
Write
γd
def
=
{ d
4π · Im(τor)
}1
2
and Pr,d(s)
def
= Hr(s ·γ−1
d ),w h e r eHr(−) is the Hermite polynomial of Proposition 2.2. Let
ζHMd
r
def
= ζPr,d ; ζ
HMd,μd
r
def
= ζPr,d,μd
Then if we regard sections ofLχ
sc|(S1)cv as functions on(S1)cv by means of the trivialization
θm, we have:
lim
d→∞
γ
− 1
2
d · (r!)
1
2 · ζOR,S1
r = lim
d→∞
γ
− 1
2
d · ζHMd
r = lim
d→∞
γ
− 1
2
d · r!
(2π)r/2 · ζDR
r
(where the convergence is relative to the sup norm for functions on(S1)cv). If, moreover,
iχ ̸=0 , then (if we trivialize Lχ
sc|μ∞ by means of exp(2πi · iχ · tcv) · θm) we have:
266

lim
d→∞
γ
− 1
2
d · (r!)
1
2 · ζOR,μ
r = lim
d→∞
γ
− 1
2
d · ζ
HMd,μd
r = lim
d→∞
γ
− 1
2
d · r!
(2π)r/2 · ζDR
r |μd
(where the convergence is relative to the sup norm for functions onμ∞ ).
Remark. It is not diﬃcult to see that in the latter part of Theorem 6.7, if χ is of order
precisely m, and one takes the limit over d which are not divisible by m, then the latter
part of Theorem 6.7 holds even if iχ = 0. Indeed, the only place where we used/will use
that iχ ̸= 0 is in the application of Chapter VI, Theorem 3.1, (2).
Proof. Let us ﬁrst consider the (S1)cv case. Recall from Lemma 6.5 that for|Ucv| = |qcv|ρ,
ρ=0 ,w eh a v e :
γ−1
d ·| |ζP ||2
L2((S1)cv) = γ−1
d · e
2π
d ·Im(τor)·(iχ /n)2
·
∑
kχ ∈ Z+
iχ
n
|P(kχ)|2 · e− 2π
d ·Im(τor)·k2
χ
= e
2π
d ·Im(τor)·(iχ /n)2
·
∑
k′ ∈ γ−1
d (Z+
iχ
n )
|Pγd (k′)|2 · e− 1
2 ·(k′)2
· γ−1
d
where k′ def
= kχ · γ−1
d ; Pγd (k′)
def
= P(k′ · γd). Thus, as d →∞ ,
lim
d→∞
γ−1
d ·| |ζP ||2
L2((S1)cv) = lim
d→∞
∫
k′ ∈R
|Pγd (k′)|2 · e− 1
2 ·(k′)2
· dk′
Put another way, this is the L2-norm of Pγd (−) for the measure on R that appears in
Proposition 2.2. Since all the norms considered here are on the ﬁnite-dimensional C-
vector space of ζP for P(−)o fd e g r e e≤ r, we thus see that if we take the basis for this
vector space given by letting
P(s)=1 ,... ,(s/γd)j,... ,(s/γd)r
and we divide the norms by γ
1
2
d , then this normed vector space converges to the normed
vector space spanned by the ﬁrstr+1 Hermite polynomials of Proposition 2.2. This proves
limd→∞ γ
− 1
2
d · (r!)
1
2 · ζOR,S1
r = limd→∞ γ
− 1
2
d · ζHMd
r . (Note that here we use the fact that
the L2-norm of the Hermite polynomial Hr is a constant (independent of r)t i m e s(r!)
1
2 .)
To prove that limd→∞ γ
− 1
2
d ·ζHMd
r = limd→∞ γ
− 1
2
d · r!
(2π)r/2 ·ζDR
r , it suﬃces to observe that
(by the latter part of Lemma 6.5)
267

lim
d→∞
∫
k′ ∈R
|Pγd (k′)|2 · e− 1
2 ·(k′)2
· dk′ = lim
d→∞
γ−1
d ·| |ζP ||2
L2(Esc)
and that theL2-norm L2(Esc) of Lemma 6.5 coincides with the norm|| ∼ || L2
R
of §4. (Note
that we use here the fact that the L2-norm of the Hermite polynomial Hr is a constant
(independent of r)t i m e s(r!)
1
2 , while the L2
R-norm of ζDR
r is a constant times
(
(2π)r
(r!)
)1
2
.)
Thus, it remains to prove the analogous results for μd when iχ ̸= 0. These results
follow similarly by applying the formula
||ζP,μd ||2
L2(μd) = |qor|− 1
d ·(iχ /n)2
·
∑
kmod ∈Z/dZ
⏐⏐⏐
∑
kχ ∈ kmod+
iχ
n
P(kχ) · q
1
2d k2
χ
or · χ((kχ − iχ
n )et)
⏐⏐⏐
2
together with the estimates of Lemma 6.1. When we apply Lemma 6.1, we take “ d,” “r”
(notation of Lemma 6.1) to be r (in the present notation), and “ a” (notation of Lemma
6.1) to be [ d
2r ] (in the present notation). This allows us to take “ b” (notation of Lemma
6.1) arbitrarily large as d →∞ . Also, note that the factor of “ dr” (notation of Lemma
6.1) in ζSS
r does not bother us here, since in the present notation, this factor corresponds
to rr which is constant as d →∞ . Thus, we obtain:
lim
d→∞
∑
kmod ∈Z/dZ
⏐⏐⏐
∑
kχ ∈ kmod+
iχ
n
P(kχ) · q
1
2d k2
χ
or · χ((kχ − iχ
n )et)
⏐⏐⏐
2
= lim
d→∞
∑
kχ ∈ Z+
iχ
n , |kχ |≤ d
2
⏐⏐⏐P(kχ) · q
1
2d k2
χ
or
⏐⏐⏐
2
= lim
d→∞
∑
kχ ∈ Z+
iχ
n
⏐⏐⏐P(kχ) · q
1
2d k2
χ
or
⏐⏐⏐
2
which is the same sum as that which appeared in the discussion of the (S1)cv case. ⃝
Remark 1. Stated in words, Theorem 6.7 asserts that:
As d →∞ , the orthogonal systems of canonical SW zeta functions
obtained from the natural inner products on L2((S1)cv) and L2(μd)
converge to: (i) one another; (ii) canonical SW zeta functions modeled
on the Hermite polynomials; (iii) the de Rham zeta functions studied in
§4,5.
Thus, in particular, Theorem 6.7 implies thatthe de Rham zeta functionsζ
DR
r are equal to
Hermite polynomial-based canonical Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functions. In other words,
268

we see that we have obtained another independent proof of the latter part of Theorem 5.3,
which, in the notation of the present discussion, reads:
ζDR
r =
[r/2]∑
j=0
(−π · u)j · (δ∗)r−2j(σχ)
Lr−2j · j!( r − 2j)!
= (2π · u)
r
2
(−1)r · r! · (−1)r · r! ·
[r/2]∑
j=0
(−2)−j · (δ∗)r−2j(σχ)
{(2π · u)
1
2 · L}r−2j · j!( r − 2j)!
= (2π · u)
r
2
(−1)r · r! · Hr({(2π · u)
1
2 · L}−1 · δ∗) · σχ
(where |L| = {8π2 ·Im(τsc)}− 1
2 , |u| = 1). Note that the scaling factor here, i.e., {(2π·u)
1
2 ·
L}, has absolute value equal to { 2π
8π2 ·Im(τsc) }
1
2 = γd. That is to say, Theorems 5.3 and 6.7
are consistent in the sense that they yield the same scaling factor. Note, relative to the
discussion surrounding Terminology 3.7, that this implies that (if we think of Im( τor)a s
ﬁxed), the ζOR,μ
r ’s (for varying d)h a v eslope 1
2 (as promised in §3).
Remark 2. It is interesting to note that in the discussion of this §, there are three natural
parameters involved; we would like to think of these parameters as follows:
Holomorphic Variable: τor
Anti-Holomorphic Variable: d
Arithmetic Variable: r
That is to say, one way to think of the goal of this paper is that we are trying to descend
the Z-scheme (M1,0)Z (i.e., the moduli stack of elliptic curves) to some sort of object over
the hypothetical/mythical “ﬁeld of constants” F1 ⊆ Z. This descent may be carried out
at diﬀerent primes; here we are interested in carrying it out at the inﬁnite prime .T h u s ,
one expects that ( M1,0)Z should have three arithmetic/real dimensions over F1.T w o
of these arithmetic dimensions should be geometric and correspond to the holomorphic
and anti-holomorphic coordinates on the complex manifold (
M1,0)C. We feel that these
two dimensions are given by τor (the holomorphic coordinate)a n dt h escaling parameterd
(which plays the role of theanti-holomorphic coordinate, and corresponds to powers of the
geometric Frobenius morphism in thep-adic theory). Note that this interpretation of these
parameters is compatible with the fact that the exponent of the exponential appearing in
the various theta/zeta functions of this§ essentially consists ofτ
or ·d−1, which is reminiscent
of the exponent “|z|2 = z ·z” of the exponential which appears in the usual complex theory
of theta functions (cf., e.g., Remark 2 following Proposition 2.2; [Mumf3],§12). Finally, we
have the index “r” which plays the role of the single arithmetic dimension ofF1.I nt h ep-
adic theory, this dimension corresponds to arithmetic Frobenius, i.e., the single dimension
of Gal(Fp).
269

Note that this point of view is compatible with the point of view of the discussion at
the end of §3 (see also Remark 1 above). Indeed, the slope as discussed in §3 is obtained
precisely by looking at the “action of the scaling parameter d.” Also, we observe that
this point of view is reminiscent of the point of view of the Introductions of [Mzk1,2]
which discuss the analogy between Frobenius actions and real analytic K¨ahler metrics.
(The connection here being that orthogonal functions typically arise from some sort of real
analytic K¨ahler metric, as in §4.)
Bibliography
[Ahlf] L. Ahlfors, Complex Analysis, McGraw-Hill Book Company (1979).
[Bate] Erd´elyi, Magnus, Oberhettinger, and Tricomi,Higher Transcendental Functions,B a t e -
man Manuscript Project, Volume II, McGraw-Hill (1953).
[Mzk1] S. Mochizuki, A Theory of Ordinary p-adic Curves, Publ. of RIMS 32, No. 6 (1996),
pp. 957-1151.
[Mzk2] S. Mochizuki, Foundations of p-adic Teichm¨uller Theory, AMS/IP Studies in Ad-
vanced Mathematics 11, American Mathematical Society/International Press (1999).
[Mumf1,2,3] D. Mumford, On the equations deﬁning abelian varieties I, II, III, Invent. Math. 1
(1966), pp. 287-354; 2 (1967), pp. 71-135; 3 (1967), pp. 215-244.
[Rice] J. R. Rice, The Approximation of Functions, Volume 1: Linear Theory , Addison-
Wesley Publishing Company (1964).
[Sze] G. Szeg¨o, Orthogonal Polynomials, Amer. Math. Soc., Colloquium Pub. 23 (1959).
[Sze2] G. Szeg¨o, Ein Beitrag zur Theorie der Thetafunktionen, Gabor Szeg¨o: Collected Pa-
pers, Vol. I, Birkh¨auser (1982), pp. 795-811.
[Wells] R. O. Wells, Diﬀerential Analysis on Complex Manifolds, Graduate Texts in Mathe-
matics 65, Springer (1980).
270

Chapter VIII: The Hodge-Arakelov
Comparison Theorem
§0. Introduction
In Chapter VII, we so-to-speak “introduced the actors” (which are systems of orthog-
onal functions) in the archimedean theory of the Comparison Isomorphism. In the present
Chapter, we “present the play.” Put another way, we complete the “Scheme-Theoretic
Comparison Isomorphism” of Chapter VI by computing the behavior of the Comparison
Isomorphism at archimedean primes. Thus, in summary, our result may be roughly stated
as follows (cf. the Introduction to Chapter VI):
There is a natural bijection between certain natural types of algebraic
functions on the universal extension of an elliptic curve and the “set-
theoretic functions” on the torsion points of the elliptic curve. Moreover,
this bijection is compatible with certain natural metrics/integral struc-
tures deﬁned at all (ﬁnite and inﬁnite) primes of a number ﬁeld, as well
as at the divisor at which the elliptic curve in question degenerates.
We refer to this result as the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism. In more precise
terms, our result, obtained by combining Theorem 7.4 of the present Chapter with Chapter
VI, Theorem 4.1, is as follows:
Theorem A. (The Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism) Let d, m ≥ 1 be
integers such that m does not divide d. Suppose that S
log is a ﬁne noetherian log scheme,
and let
Clog → Slog
be a log elliptic curve over Slog such that the divisor at inﬁnity D ⊆ S (i.e., the pull-
back of the divisor at inﬁnity of (M1,0)Z via the classifying morphism S → (M1,0)Z)i sa
Cartier divisor on S. Also, let us assume that ´etale locally on the completion of S along
D, the pull-back of the Tate parameter q to this completion admits a d-th root, and that
we are given a torsion point
η ∈ E∞ ,S(S∞ )
271

of order precisely m which deﬁnes line bundles Lst,η, L
ev
st,η (cf. Chapter V, §1). If d is
odd (respectively, even), then let L
def
= Lst,η (respectively, L
def
= L
ev
st,η). Then:
(1) (Compatibility with Base-Change) The formation of the push-forward (cf.
Chapter VI, Deﬁnition 1.3)
(fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{∞ ,et}
(along with its ﬁltration) commutes with base-change (among basesSlog satisfying
the hypotheses given above).
(2) (Zero Locus of the Determinant) Assume that S is Z-ﬂat . The scheme-
theoretic zero locus of the determinant det(Ξ{∞ ,et}), i.e., the determinant of
the evaluation map (cf. Chapter V, Proposition 2.2; Chapter VI, Theorem 3.1,
(1))
Ξ{∞ ,et} :( fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{∞ ,et}→ (fS)∗(L|
(dE†
∞ )
)
is given by the divisor
d · [η
⋂
(dE)]
(where dE is the kernel of multiplication byd on Ed). In fact, the divisor of poles
of the inverse morphism to Ξ{∞ ,et} is contained in the divisor [η ⋂ (dE)].
(3) (Analytic Torsion at the Divisor at Inﬁnity)For eachι, there is a sequence
of elements
aι = {(aι)0,... ,(aι)d−1};( aι)j ≈ j2
8d
of Q≥0 · log(q),w h e r e(aι)j goes roughly (as a function of j)a s j2
8d (cf. Chapter
VI, Theorem 3.1, (2)), such that the subquotients of the natural ﬁltration on the
domain of Ξ{∞ ,et} admits natural isomorphisms:
(F
j+1/Fj)((fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{∞ ,et}) −→ 1
j! · exp(−(aι)j) · (fS)∗(L|E∞ ,S ) ⊗OS τ⊗j
E
272

for j =0 ,... ,d − 1. Moreover, the sections ofL|
E†
∞ ,[d]
that realize these bijections
have q-expansions in a neighborhood of inﬁnity that are given explicitly in
Chapter V, Theorem 4.8.
(4) (Integrality Properties at the Inﬁnite Prime) Suppose that D = ∅,a n dS
is of ﬁnite type over C. Let us then write L, Ξ, dE† , E†
[d] for L, Ξ{∞ ,et}, dE†
∞ ,
E†
∞ ,[d]. Then one may equip L with a (smooth, i.e., C∞ ) metric |∼| L whose
curvature is translation-invariant on the ﬁbers of E → S. Moreover, such
a metric is unique up to multiplication by a (smooth) positive function onS(C).
Then |∼| L deﬁnes a metric on the vector bundle (fS)∗(L|
dE† ) (i.e., the range
of Ξ), namely, the L2-metric for “ L-valued functions on dE† ” (where we assume
that the total mass of dE† is 1). Since Ξ is an isomorphism, this metric thus
induces a metric on (fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d (i.e., the domain of Ξ), which we denote by
|| ∼ || et
and refer to as the´etale metric. On the other hand, by using the canonical real
analytic splitting of E†
[d](C) → E(C) (i.e., the unique splitting which is a contin-
uous homomorphism), we may split sections of (fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d into components
which are real analytic sections of L⊗ τ⊗r
E (where r<d ) over E(C).S i n c eτE
gets a natural metric by square integration overE, these components have natural
L2-norms determined by integrating their|∼| 2
L over the ﬁbers of E(C) → S(C).
This deﬁnes what we refer to as the de Rham metric
|| ∼ || DR
on (fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d. The relationship between the ´etale and de Rham metrics may
be described using three “models”:
(A.) The Hermite Model: This model states that if we ﬁx r<d ,
and let d →∞ , then over any compact subset of S(C),t h e´etale metric
|| ∼ || et on Fr((fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d) converges (up to a factor ≤ eπ+r, ≥ 1)
to the metric || ∼ || DR, as well as to a certain metric “ || ∼ || HMd ”
deﬁned by considering Hermite polynomials scaled by a factor of
(constant)·
√
d in the derivatives of the theta functions∈ (fS)∗(L|E)=
F1((fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d).
(B.) The Legendre Model: This model states (roughly) that over
any compact subset of S(C),ac e r t a i naverage – which we denote
273

|| ∼ || w,μa – of translates of the ´etale metric || ∼ || et on (fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d
is equal (provided d ≥ 25), up to a factor of (constant)d, to the de
Rham metric || ∼ || DR, as well as to a certain metric “ || ∼ || Tch”d e -
ﬁned by considering discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials scaled by
af a c t o ro fdin the derivatives of the theta functions ∈ (fS)∗(L|E)=
F1((fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d). These discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials are dis-
crete versions of the Legendre polynomials, and in fact, if we letd →∞
with the said scaling by d, then the discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials
converge uniformly to the Legendre polynomials.
(C.) The Binomial Model: This model involves the explicit q-expan-
sions (where we write E = Gm/qZ,a n d q is a holomorphic function
which is deﬁned, at least locally, onS(C)) referred to in (3) above, which
are essentially binomial coeﬃcient polynomials (scaled by 1) in
the derivatives of the theta functions∈ (fS)∗(L|E)= F1((fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d).
If we divide these functions by appropriate powers of q, then the norm
|| ∼ || qCG for which these functions divided by powers of q are or-
thonormal satisﬁes the following property: If d ≥ 12,a n d Im(τ) ≥
200{log2(d)+ n · log(d)+ n · log(n)} (where q =e x p ( 2πiτ)), then:
n−1 · e−32d ·| |∼| | qCG ≤| |∼| | et ≤ e4d ·| |∼| | qCG
Here, the factor of n−1 that appears is the exact archimedean ana-
logue of the poles that appeared at ﬁnite primes in (2) above.
Finally, for each of these three models, thecombinatorial/arithmetic portion of the
analytic torsion (i.e., the portion not arising from letting the elliptic curveE degenerate
– cf. (3) above for the portion arising from degeneration of the elliptic curve) induced on
(Fr+1/Fr)((fS)∗(L|
E†
[d]
)<d) by the metrics || ∼ || DR; || ∼ || HMd ; || ∼ || Tch; || ∼ || w,μa ;
|| ∼ || qCG (in their respective domains of applicability) as r → d, goes (modulo factors of
the order (constant)d)a s
≈ (r!)−1 ≈ (d!)−1
which is precisely what you would expect by applying the product formula to the com-
putation of the “analytic torsion” in the ﬁnite prime case , which consists of a factor
of precisely (r!)−1 (cf. Chapter V, Theorem 3.1; Chapter VI, Theorem 4.1; Chapter VII,
Proposition 3.4).
As discussed in the statement of Theorem A, the key point of the archimedean portion
of Theorem A is the comparison of the ´etale and de Rham metrics || ∼ || et, || ∼ || DR.
Unfortunately, we are unable to prove a simple sharp result that they always coincide.
Instead, we choose three natural “domains of investigation” – which we refer to as models
274

– where we compare these two metrics using a particular system of functions which are well-
adapted to the domain of investigation in question. One of the most important features of
these three models is that they each have natural scaling factors associated to them. The
three models, along with their natural scaling factors, and natural domains of applicability
are as follows:
Hermite Model
(scaling factor = d
1
2 ) : nondegenerating E,ﬁ x e dr<d
Legendre Model (scaling factor = d) : nondegenerating E, varying r<d
Binomial Model (scaling factor = 1) : degenerating E
It is interesting to observe that the exponents appearing in these scaling factors, i.e.,
0, 1
2 ,1, which we refer to as slopes, are precisely the same as the slopes that appear when
one considers the action of Frobenius on the crystalline cohomology of an elliptic curve
at a ﬁnite prime (cf. the discussions at the end of Chapter VII, §3, 6, for more on this
analogy).
If we write E = G
m/qZ, q =e x p ( 2πiτ), then the Hermite Model (respectively, Leg-
endre Model, Binomial Model) corresponds to the case where/is most useful when Im( τ)
is ﬁxed (respectively, → 0; →∞ ). The Binomial Model is interesting in that it is themost
closely analogous to the situation at the ﬁnite primes. The Hermite model is interesting in
that it sheds light on the factors ofq≈ 1
8d ·j2
– which are essentially Gaussians – that appear
in Theorem A, (3). Moreover, the Hermite model in some sense makes explicit thatessen-
tially what we are doing throughout this entire paper is simply studying the derivatives of a
Gaussian/theta function. Finally, the Legendre model is interesting in that it shows how
the Comparison Isomorphism for general elliptic curves may be thought of as beingessen-
tially a (more complicated) version of the Fundamental Combinatorial Model(cf. Chapter
VII, §3) given by considering integer-valued polynomial functions on a set of d points.
Our main technique for comparing the ´etale and de Rham metrics in these various
models is to reduce the problem to the computation of certain metrics on certain ﬁnite-
dimensional spaces of q-series. The q-series then tend to have the form:
q-series = “head” + “tail”
where
“head” = a function of the sort that appears in the “model”
while
⏐⏐⏐ “tail”
⏐⏐⏐ ≤ ϵ
(i.e., the tail is rather small compared to the head). Such estimates then show that the
behavior of the q-series is roughly the same as the behavior as the special functions of the
275

“model.” This sort of analysis was already carried out for the Hermite Model, which is
technically the simplest of the three models, in Chapter VII, §6. The analogous analysis
for the Legendre Model (which is technically the next simplest of the three) is carried out
in §1,2, of the present Chapter. Finally, we carry out this analysis for the Binomial Model,
which is by far the most technically intricate of the three models, in §3,4,5, of the present
Chapter. In §6, we then relate these estimates to the analysis of the de Rham metric given
in Chapter VII, §4,5. Finally, in §7, we summarize everything in the form of the main
theorem.
In a word, the main point of this sort of “head + tail” estimate is to show that the
“tail” is small. The reason that the tail is small is, invariably, because it decays like a
Gaussian,s i n c et h eq-series in question are essentially just derivatives of theta functions.
Unfortunately, however, because we are ultimately working with the L2-metric || ∼ || et
deﬁned by a discrete set of points(as opposed to, say, theL2-metric obtained by integrating
over the entire continuous elliptic curve in question), numerous technical diﬃculties arise.
These technical diﬃculties make the resulting analysis rather unpleasant, especially in the
case of the binomial model. Because of the cumbersome and unenlightening nature of this
analysis, we submit that the experienced mathematician may ﬁnd it substantially easier
to work out the details for himself/herself than to wade through the lengthy estimates of
the present Chapter.
Also, we remark in passing, that although in Theorem A, we only give “qualitative
estimates” (e.g., of the form “(constant)
d”), in fact, all the results that we derive involve
explicit estimates of the constants that appear. We refer to §6,7, for such explicit estimates.
Nevertheless, despite the fact that we made an eﬀort to give such explicit estimates of
the constants that appear, we made no eﬀort to give “best possible estimates” for these
constants. Thus, throughout the arguments of the present Chapter, the reader will often
note that the estimates tend to be rather weak, and that with very little extra eﬀort,
one could give somewhat stronger estimates for these constants. Our aim here was not
to make any pretense of giving such strong estimates, but only to give estimates that are
representative of the essential technique involved.
Finally, we remark that although this “head + tail” technique has an unenlightening
technical side, it also admits the following intriguingphilosophical interpretation. Namely,
the terms appearing in the q-series are naturally indexed by Z. Roughly speaking, the
terms that contribute to the head are those numbered 0,1,... ,N −1( w h e r eN is a positive
integer). The remaining terms then naturally form deformations of the “head terms” in
the following fashion: The term numbered byj deforms the term numbered by the unique
Head(j) ∈{ 0, ... ,N − 1} such that Head(j) ≡ j modulo N. Thus, the fact that ultimately
only the “head terms” contribute signiﬁcantly may thus beinterpreted as the datum of the
map (from Z to {0, 1,... ,N − 1})
j ↦→ Head(j)
in the language of function-theory . Put another way, it may be regarded as a function-
theoretic encoding of the splitting
276

Z ∼= {0, 1,... ,N − 1}× (N · Z)
(given by j ↦→ (Head(j),j − Head(j))).
This interpretation is interesting for the following reason: As explained in the Intro-
duction to the present paper, the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism was originally
envisioned as a sort of Hodge theory-type comparison theorem between de Rham and
´etale/singular cohomology, in the context of Arakelov theory. By analogy with the case
of a geometric base (as opposed to, say, a number ﬁeld as base) for the elliptic curve in
question, such a comparison should result in some sort of Kodaira-Spencer map, i.e., a
map from the tangent vectors of the base to tangent vectors of the moduli stack of elliptic
curves (cf. the Introduction). Thus, in particular, this sort of comparison theorem should
have something to do with absolute diﬀerentials of Z, i.e., with the point of view that Z
contains some sort of “absolute ﬁeld of constants F
1” over which it acts like a polynomial
algebra:
“Z ∼= F1[t]”
But now note that this formula “Z ∼= F1[t]” is strikingly reminiscent of the decomposition
“Z ∼= {0, 1,... ,N − 1}× (N · Z)” that appeared above. Thus, in summary, it is as if the
“head + tail” approach is a sort of appeal to the notion Z ∼= F1[t] encoded in function-
theoretic language.
In fact, it is tempting to take this analogy a step further as follows: The “fundamental
symmetries” of a polarized elliptic curve are controlled by the “theta group” and its anal-
ogous Lie algebra version (cf. Chapter VII, §4). Moreover, this sort of algebraic structure
is exactly what noncommutative geometers refer to as anoncommutative torus.T h u s ,it is
as if the mathematics of the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism is trying to assert
that:
The symmetries/twist inherent in the inclusion “ F
1 ⊆ Z” are precisely
the symmetries/twist described by the structure known as a noncommu-
tative torus.
It is the hope of the author that some day future research will allow one to make these
ideas more rigorous.
277

§1. Averages of Metrics
In this §, we discuss certain metrics on the space of functions on S1 obtained by
averaging the usual L2-metrics obtained by restricting these functions to translates of a
ﬁxed ﬁnite subgroup of S1. These metrics will play an important role in the theory of §2.
We would like to begin by discussing the Hilbert space L2(S1) equipped with the
standard inner product:
(f,g )
def
= 1
2π ·
∫
S1
f · g
We shall writeU
def
=e x p ( 2πit)( w h e r et ∈ [0,2π)) for the standard coordinate onS1.T h u s ,
any element f ∈ L2(S1) may be written in the form
f =
∑
k∈Z
ck · Uk
(where ck ∈ C). Then L2-norm of such an f is then given by
||f ||2 def
=
∑
k∈Z
|ck |2
Let us write C∞ (S1) ⊆ L2(S1) for the subspace of smooth functions on S1.
Now let us suppose that we are also given two positive integers d, a.W r i t e˜d
def
= d · a.
Suppose that we are also given positive real numbers (“weights”) w0,... ,wd−1.I f φ =∑d−1
k=0 γk · Uk (where γk ∈ C) is a function on μd (⊆ S1), then we would like to consider
the norm
||φ||2
w
def
= 1
d ·
d−1∑
k=0
wk ·| γk|2
on L2(μd). Thus, for smooth functions f = ∑
k∈Z ck · Uk ∈C ∞ (S1), we have:
||f ||2
w
def
= ||(f |μd )||2
w = 1
d ·
d−1∑
k=0
wk ·
⏐⏐⏐
∑
k′ ∈k+d·Z
ck′
⏐⏐⏐
2
Moreover, if α ∈ S1,t h e nw em a ytranslate || ∼ || w as follows:
||(Tα(f)|μd )||2
w = 1
d ·
d−1∑
k=0
wk ·
⏐⏐⏐
∑
k′ ∈k+d·Z
ck′ · αk′
⏐⏐⏐
2
278

(where Tα(f)(U)
def
= f(α · U)). Note that ||(Tα(f)|μd )||2
w only depends on the image of α
in S1/μd. Thus, if we write αμ for the image of α in S1/μd, it makes sense to deﬁne
||f ||2
w,α μ
def
= ||(Tα(f)|μd )||2
w
Now we have the following result:
Proposition 1.1. For smooth functions f = ∑
k∈Z ck · Uk ∈C ∞ (S1), we have:
||f ||2
w,μa
def
= 1
a ·
∑
αμ∈μa
||f ||2
w,α μ
= 1
d ·
d−1∑
k=0
wk ·
a−1∑
k′=0
⏐⏐⏐
∑
k′′ ∈k+d·k′+˜d·Z
ck′′
⏐⏐⏐
2
≥ 1
d ·
d−1∑
k=0
wk ·
⏐⏐⏐
∑
k′ ∈k+˜d·Z
ck′
⏐⏐⏐
2
(where we regard μa = μ˜d/μd ⊆ S1/μd).
Proof. Indeed, from the deﬁnitions, we have:
1
a ·
∑
αμ∈μa
||f ||2
w,α μ = 1
a ·
∑
αμ∈μa
1
d ·
d−1∑
k=0
wk ·
⏐⏐⏐
∑
k′ ∈k+d·Z
ck′ · αk′
⏐⏐⏐
2
= 1
a ·
∑
αμ∈μa
1
d ·
d−1∑
k=0
wk ·
⏐⏐⏐
a−1∑
k′=0
∑
k′′ ∈k+d·k′+˜d·Z
ck′′ · αk′′
⏐⏐⏐
2
= 1
a ·
∑
αμ∈μa
1
d ·
d−1∑
k=0
wk ·
⏐⏐⏐
a−1∑
k′=0
αd·k′ ∑
k′′ ∈k+d·k′+˜d·Z
ck′′
⏐⏐⏐
2
(where α ∈ S1 denotes any element that maps to αμ ∈ S1/μd). Thus, (readjusting the
notation) we see that it suﬃces to prove that if λ0,... ,λa−1 ∈ C,t h e n
1
a ·
∑
α∈μa
⏐⏐⏐
a−1∑
k=0
αk · λk
⏐⏐⏐
2
=
a−1∑
k=0
⏐⏐⏐λk
⏐⏐⏐
2
To prove this, it suﬃces to observe that
279

⏐⏐⏐
a−1∑
k=0
αk · λk
⏐⏐⏐
2
=
(a−1∑
k=0
αk · λk
)(a−1∑
j=0
α−j · λj
)
=
a−1∑
k=0
a−1∑
j=0
αk−j · λk · λj
(where λj denotes the complex conjugate of λj). But if we average over α ∈ μa in this
last sum, we see that the only terms that survive are those for whichk = j. Moreover, the
sum of these terms is precisely ∑a−1
k=0
⏐⏐
⏐λ
k
⏐⏐
⏐
2
, as desired. ⃝
§2. The Legendre Model
In this §, we study the space of canonical SW zeta functions equipped with a certain
natural metric, arising from restriction to torsion points. In particular, we show that when
equipped with this metric, the space of canonical SW zeta functions becomes “approxi-
mately isomorphic” to the space of discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials studied in Chapter
VII, §3.
We begin by making certainestimates, based on the estimates of Chapter VII, Lemma
6.1. In the following discussion, we use the notation of Chapter VII, §6; also, we assume
(for simplicity) that d ≥ 2. First, we recall the theta function Θ
χ
∑
k∈Z
q
1
2 ·k2+(iχ /n)·k
sc · U2mk+iχ
cv · χ(ket)=
∑
k∈Z
q
1
d (1
2 ·k2+(iχ /n)·k)
or · U2mk+iχ
cv · χ(ket)
In Chapter VII, §6, we also considered the derivatives
ζSS
r
def
=
(δ∗
χ
d
)r
(Θχ)=
∑
k∈Z
(k
d
)r
· q
1
d (1
2 ·k2+(iχ /n)·k)
or · U2mk+iχ
cv · χ(ket)
where (to simplify the notation) we omit the “ ·θ−m” in the deﬁnition of ζSS
r .
To prepare for the discussion below, we would like to introduce various objects related
to the coeﬃcients of this expansion. If we think of the integers 0,... ,d − 1 as representing
the elements of Z/dZ,t h e nf o rj =0 ,... ,d − 1, let us write
ej
def
=M i n
{1
2 · k2 +( iχ/n) · k)
}
280

(where the minimum is over k such that k ≡ j modulo d)a n dwj
def
= |qsc|−2·ej ≥ 1. Next,
recall the linear function “ Ld(T)= T +λd − iχ
2m ” of Chapter V, Theorem 4.8. Let us write
ld
def
= λd
d
Thus, 0 ≤ ld ≤ 1
2 (since d ≥ 2). It is easy to check that λd has the following property (cf.
the proof of Chapter V, Theorem 4.8): the minimum appearing in the deﬁnition of ej is
attained for any k such that 0 ≤ k + λd ≤ d − 1. Let us write
KCrit
def
= {0 − λd,1 − λd,... ,d − 1 − λd}
for the set of such “critical” k. It thus follows that ej is attained for some k satisfying
|k|≤ d. In particular, it follows that 2|ej |≤| k2 +( iχ/m) · k|≤ 3
2 · d2, hence that
0 ≤ log(wj) ≤ 3π · Im(τor) · d ≤ 6(1 +ϵ)Q · d
(in the notation of Chapter VII, Lemma 6.1, (2)). Thus,if, for instance, one is considering
a situation in which Im(τor) varies in a compact subset of the upper half-plane, then it
follows that on that compact subset, wj is bounded above and below by constants Cd
1 , Cd
2 ,
where C1,C2 ∈ R>0 depend only on the compact set.
Now that w0,... ,wd−1 have been deﬁned, we may apply the theory of §1. In particu-
lar, if we ﬁx a positive integer a ≥ 2, then it follows from Proposition 1.1 that for smooth
functions f = ∑
k∈Z φk · Uk ∈C ∞ ((S1)sc), we have the following “averaged” L2-norm:
||f ||2
w,μa
def
= 1
d ·
d−1∑
j=0
wj ·
a−1∑
j′=0
⏐⏐
⏐
∑
k∈j+d·j′+˜d·Z
φk
⏐⏐
⏐
2
In this §, we would like to consider two related norms:
||f ||2
Tchϵ
def
= 1
d ·
∑
j∈KCrit
wj ·
⏐⏐⏐
∑
k∈j+˜d·Z
φk
⏐⏐⏐
2
≤| |f ||2
w,μa
(where, for j< 0o r >d − 1, wj is deﬁned as wj′ for the uniquej′ ∈{ 0, ... ,d − 1} such that
j′ ≡ j; and the inequality follows from the fact that ||f ||2
Tchϵ is deﬁned to be the sum of a
subset of the same collection of nonnegative numbers whose sum constitutes the deﬁnition
of ||f ||2
w,μa
)a n d
||f ||2
Tch
def
= 1
d ·
∑
j∈KCrit
wj ·
⏐⏐⏐φj
⏐⏐⏐
2
281

In fact, in the following discussion, we would like to consider functions f ∈C ∞ ((S1)cv)
which are of the form f1 · Uiχ
cv ,f o rs o m ef1 ∈C ∞ ((S1)sc). For such f,w ew r i t e||f ||??
def
=
||f1||??, where ??= w, μa;T c hϵ;o rT c h .
Next, let us observe that when f =Θ χ, then it follows from the above discussion
concerning ld that the resulting “ φj”s a t i s f ywj ·| φj |2 =1 ,f o rj ∈ KCrit. Similarly, if δ∗
χ
is the diﬀerential operator of Chapter VII, §6, and P(−) is a polynomial with complex
coeﬃcients, then
||P(δ∗
χ) · Θχ ||2
Tch = 1
d ·
∑
j∈KCrit
⏐⏐⏐P(j)
⏐⏐⏐
2
that is to say, the expression on the right-hand side of this equation is essentially (i.e.,
up to a factor of 1
d in front, and a shift in the variable j by the number λd of Chapter
V, Theorem 4.8) the (squared) L2-norm || ∼ || 2 considered in our discussion of discrete
Tchebycheﬀ polynomials (Chapter VII, §3). In the following, we would like to show that
in the situation that we are interested in, the norms subscriptedw, μa;T c hϵ;a n dT c ha r e
very close to another and hence that the theory of orthogonal functions with respect to the
w, μa-norm is very close to the theory of discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomialsof Chapter VII,
§3.
This observation motivates the following deﬁnitions: First, we introduce some inde-
terminates
t
def
= T
d ; s
def
= t + ld
Thus, as T ranges over KCrit, s ranges over 0, 1
d ,... , d−1
d .I np a r t i c u l a r ,w eh a v e
||P(δ∗
χ) · Θχ ||2
Tch = 1
d ·
∑
j∈KCrit
⏐⏐⏐P(−)|T=j
⏐⏐⏐
2
= 1
d ·
d−1∑
j=0
⏐⏐⏐P(j)|s= j
d
⏐⏐⏐
2
This makes the relationship between the norms considered here and the norms of Chapter
VII, §3, explicit. Recall that the “ normalized discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials” ˜tr(s)o f
Chapter VII, Proposition 3.2, are orthonormal with respect to the (square L2-) norm
Q(s) ↦→ 1
d · ∑d−1
j=0
⏐⏐⏐Q(j
d )
⏐⏐⏐
2
. Now we deﬁne the (discrete) Tchebycheﬀ canonical SW zeta
functions as follows:
ζTCH
r
def
= ˜tr(δ∗
χ
d + ld) · (Θχ)=
∑
k∈Z
˜tr(k
d + ld) · q
1
d (1
2 ·k2+(iχ /n)·k)
or · U2mk+iχ
cv · χ(ket)
282

where 0 ≤ r ≤ d − 1, ˜tr(s) is the “normalized discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomial” of Chapter
VII, Proposition 3.2. Thus,
The ζTCH
r are orthonormal with respect to the inner product deﬁned by
|| ∼ || Tch.
Now we would like to estimate the diﬀerence between the various norms deﬁned above:
Lemma 2.1. Let A be an integer which satisﬁes A ≥ Max(a,1+ Q−1),w h e r eQ
def
=
π
4 · Im(τor). Then we have:
||P(δ∗
χ) · Θχ ||Tchϵ ≤| |P(δ∗
χ) · Θχ ||w,μa ≤ (r +1 )
9
2 · e4r+4 · A2r+1 ·| |P(δ∗
χ) · Θχ ||Tch
for any polynomial with complex coeﬃcients P(−) of degree ≤ r<d .
Proof. The ﬁrst inequality was already noted in the discussion above. Thus, let us prove
the second inequality. We may assume without loss of generality that||P(δ∗
χ)·Θχ ||2
Tch =1 .
Thus, it follows from the above discussion that
P(T)=
r∑
j=0
γj · ˜tj(t + ld)
where γj ∈ C, ∑r
j=0 |γj |2 =1 .
Next, we would like to bound the coeﬃcients ofP(T)a sa polynomial in t.T od ot h i s ,
ﬁrst we observe that the coeﬃcients of˜tj(−)( f o rj ≤ r) may be bounded by (2r+1)
1
2 ·e3r+1
(by Chapter VII, Proposition 3.2, (ii.)). Moreover, if one expands (t+ld)j (for j ≤ r)a sa
polynomial in t, the absolute values of the coeﬃcients are bounded by
(j
j′
)
·|ld|j′
≤ 2j ≤ 2r
(where 0 ≤ j′ ≤ j, and we note that |ld|≤ 1
2 ). Since (t+ld)j (for j ≤ r)h a s≤ r +1terms
as a polynomial in t, it thus follows that as a polynomial int, ˜tj(t + ld) has coeﬃcients of
absolute value ≤ (r +1 )
5
2 · e3r+2 · 2r ≤ (r +1 )
5
2 · e4r+2.S i n c e|γj |≤ 1( f o rj ≤ r), we thus
obtain that as a polynomial in t, P(T)= P(t + ld) has coeﬃcients of absolute value
≤ (r +1 )
7
2 · e4r+2
Thus, we obtain
||P(δ∗
χ) · Θχ ||w,μa ≤ (r +1 )
7
2 · e4r+2 ·
r∑
j=0
||
(δ∗
χ
d
)j
· Θχ ||w,μa
≤ (r +1 )
7
2 · e4r+2 ·
r∑
j=0
||ζSS
j ||w,μa
283

On the other hand, the terms ||ζSS
j ||w,μa may be bounded by what was already done in
Chapter VII, Lemma 6.1, as follows. To simplify the notation (more precisely, to free up
the letter “ j” for use in future summations), we consider the case j = r.W h e nj<r ,a
similar argument applies. Now recall the general formula:
||f ||
2
w,μa
= 1
d ·
d−1∑
j=0
wj ·
a−1∑
j′=0
⏐⏐⏐
∑
k∈j+d·j′+˜d·Z
φk
⏐⏐⏐
2
In the case of f = ζSS
r , we would like to divide up the task of bounding the |φk| into two
cases, the case where |k| <A · d, and the case where |k|≥ A · d:
Case (i): First, we consider the case where |k| <A · d. In this case, it
follows from Chapter VII, Lemma 6.1, (1), (plus the deﬁnition of wk)
that wj ·|φk |2 ≤ A2r. Note that the number of k in a given residue class
modulo ˜d = a · d that fall under the present Case (i) is ≤ 2 · A · a−1.
Case (ii): Next, we consider the case where |k|≥ A · d.L e t k0 denote
the unique integer ∈ KCrit such that k ≡ k0 modulo d.L e t σk be
the sign of k, i.e., 1 (respectively, −1) if k is > 0 (respectively, < 0).
Write kδ
def
= σk · (|k|−| k0|). Note that since |k0|≤ d, we obtain that
|kδ|≥ (A − 1) · d ≥ 1( s i n c eA ≥ 2). Thus,
(k2 +( iχ/m) · k) − (k2
0 +( iχ/m) · k0)=( |k0| + |kδ|)2 − k2
0 +( iχ/m) · (kδ + k − k0 − kδ)
= k2
δ +( iχ/m) · kδ +2 ·| k0|·| kδ| +( iχ/m) · (σk ·| k0|− k0)
≥ k2
δ +( iχ/m) · kδ +2 ·| k0|· (|kδ|− 1)
≥ k2
δ +( iχ/m) · kδ
But note that, if we raise these inequalities to the base qsc, we obtain
that
wj ·| φk |2 = wk0 ·| φk|2 ≤
( |k|
|kδ|
)2r
·| φkδ |2
≤
( A
A − 1
)2r
·| φkδ |2 ≤ 4r ·| φkδ |2
Thus, by Chapter VII, Lemma 6.1, ifA−1 ≥ Q−1,w h e r eQ
def
= π
4 ·Im(τor)
(and we take “ b,” “ϵ”i n loc. cit. to be 1; “ a”i n loc. cit. to be A − 1;
“ k”i nloc. cit. to be kδ), then
∑
|k|≥A·d
w
1
2
j ·| φk|≤ 2r+2 · e−(A−1)·d ≤ 2d+2 · e−(A−1)·d
≤ 4 · e−(A−2)·d ≤ 4
284

If we then add up the contributions from these two cases, we obtain
1
d ·
d−1∑
j=0
wj ·
a−1∑
j′=0
⏐⏐⏐
∑
k∈j+d·j′+˜d·Z
φk
⏐⏐⏐
2
≤ 1
d ·
d−1∑
j=0
a−1∑
j′=0
( ∑
k∈j+d·j′+˜d·Z
w
1
2
j ·
⏐⏐⏐φk
⏐⏐⏐
)2
≤ 1
d ·
d−1∑
j=0
a−1∑
j′=0
(
2 · A · a−1 · A2r +4
)2
≤ a ·
(
6 · a−1 · A2r+1
)2
≤
(
6 · A2r+1
)2
(where we use that A ≥ a in the third inequality). Thus, we have ||ζSS
r ||w,μa ≤ 6 · A2r+1.
Combining this with the previous inequalities concerning||P(δ∗
χ)·Θχ ||2
w,μa
, we thus obtain
||P(δ∗
χ) · Θχ ||w,μa ≤ (r +1 )
9
2 · e4r+2 · 6 · A2r+1 ≤ (r +1 )
9
2 · e4r+4 · A2r+1
as desired. ⃝
Next, we would like to compare || ∼ || Tchϵ and || ∼ || Tch.
Lemma 2.2. Suppose that a ≥ Max(2+ Q−1,8),w h e r eQ
def
= π
4 ·Im(τor). Then we have:
{
1−(d+1)
9
2 ·e4−d
}
·||P(δ∗
χ)·Θχ ||Tch ≤| |P(δ∗
χ)·Θχ ||Tchϵ ≤
{
1+(d+1)
9
2 ·e4−d
}
·||P(δ∗
χ)·Θχ ||Tch
for any polynomial with complex coeﬃcients P(−) of degree ≤ r<d . Here, the ﬁrst
expression in large brackets, i.e., 1 − (d +1 )
9
2 · e4−d,i s ≥ 1
2 if d ≥ 25.
Proof. The argument is similar to the argument given for “Case (ii)” in the proof of
Lemma 2.1 (except that we take “A”t ob ea − 1). Indeed, the diﬀerence between the two
norms
||f ||2
Tchϵ
def
= 1
d ·
∑
j∈KCrit
wj ·
⏐⏐⏐
∑
k∈j+˜d·Z
φk
⏐⏐⏐
2
;a n d ||f ||2
Tch
def
= 1
d ·
∑
j∈KCrit
wj ·
⏐⏐⏐φj
⏐⏐⏐
2
is that the sum in the deﬁnition of ||f ||2
Tchϵ involves the φk for k ∈ (KCrit + ˜d · Z)\KCrit,
i.e., (by the triangle inequality)
285

(||f ||Tchϵ −| |f ||Tch)2 ≤| |f ||2
TchΔ
def
= 1
d ·
∑
j∈KCrit
wj ·
⏐⏐⏐
∑
k∈(j+˜d·Z)\{j}
φk
⏐⏐⏐
2
Just as in the proof of Lemma 2.1, we may assume without loss of generality that||P(δ∗
χ) ·
Θχ ||2
Tch = 1. This implies (just as in the proof of Lemma 2.1) that the coeﬃcients ofP(−)
have absolute value ≤ (r +1 )
7
2 · e4r+2, hence that
||P(δ∗
χ) · Θχ ||TchΔ ≤ (r +1 )
7
2 · e4r+2 ·
r∑
j=0
||ζSS
j ||TchΔ
Thus, it suﬃces to bound ||ζSS
r ||TchΔ . But (as remarked at the beginning of this proof)
this was essentially already done in “Case (ii)” of the proof of Lemma 2.1. More precisely,
let k0 ∈ KCrit, k ≡ k0 modulo ˜d; assume, moreover, that k/∈ KCrit. We would like to
consider the coeﬃcient φk in the expansion off = ζSS
r . Note that since |k0|≤ d, k ̸∈ KCrit,
it follows that |k|≥ ˜d − d =( a − 1)d. Thus, if we substitute a − 1( ≥ 1+ Q−1) for “A”i n
the treatment of Case (ii) in the proof of Lemma 2.1, we obtain
∑
|k|≥(a−1)·d
w
1
2
k0
·| φk|≤ 4 · e−(a−3)·d
hence
||ζSS
r ||2
Tch
Δ = 1
d ·
∑
k0∈KCrit
wk0 ·
⏐⏐⏐
∑
k∈(k0+˜d·Z)\{k0}
φk
⏐⏐⏐
2
≤ 1
d ·
∑
k0∈KCrit
16 · e−2(a−3)·d =1 6 · e−2(a−3)·d
Thus, we have
||P(δ∗
χ) · Θχ ||TchΔ ≤ (r +1 )
9
2 · e4r+2 · 4 · e−(a−3)·d
≤ (d +1 )
9
2 · e4 · e−(a−7)·d ≤ (d +1 )
9
2 · e4−d
(where in the last inequality we use that a ≥ 8). Moreover, (d +1 )
9
2 · e4−d ≤ 1
2 if d ≥ 25.
This completes the proof. ⃝
We are now ready to state the main result of this §:
Theorem 2.3. Let Hd
χ be the vector space of functions on S1 of the form P(δ∗
χ) · Θχ,
where P(−) is a polynomial of degree<d with complex coeﬃcients, and Θχ and δ∗
χ are as
286

deﬁned in Chapter VII, §6. For r ∈ Z,l e tFr(Hd
χ) ⊆H d
χ be the subspace of such functions
for which the degree of P(−) is ≤ r (cf. the notation of Chapter VII, §1). Let a ≥ 8 be
an integer. Let || ∼ || w,μa be the L2-norm on Hd
χ given by averaging the L2-norms on
α · μd ⊆ (S1)sc with weights w0,... ,wd−1 (as deﬁned at the beginning of this§)a s α varies
in μa·d/μd (see the above discussion for more details). Let || ∼ || Tch be the L2-norm on
Hd
χ given by:
||P(δ∗
χ) · Θχ ||2
Tch = 1
d ·
d−1∑
j=0
⏐⏐⏐P(j − λd)
⏐⏐⏐
2
where ld is 1
d times the constant “λd” of Chapter V, Theorem 4.8.
Then as r varies over 0,... ,d − 1, the functions
ζTCH
r
def
= ˜tr(δ∗
χ
d +ld)·(Θχ)=
∑
k∈Z
˜tr(k
d +ld)·q
1
d (1
2 ·k2+(iχ /n)·k)
or ·U2mk+iχ
cv ·χ(ket) ∈ Fr(Hd
χ)
(where ˜tr(−) is the “normalized discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomial” of Chapter VII, Propo-
sition 3.2) form anorthonormal basis of Hd
χ with respect to the inner product associated to
norm || ∼ || Tch. Moreover, if a ≥ Max(2 +Q−1,8) (where Q
def
= π
4 · Im(τor) – cf. Chapter
VII, Lemma 6.1), and d ≥ 25, then we have
1
2 ·| |P(δ∗
χ) · Θχ ||Tch ≤| |P(δ∗
χ) · Θχ ||w,μa ≤ (r +1 )
9
2 · e4r+4 · a2r+1 ·| |P(δ∗
χ) · Θχ ||Tch
In particular, if ζ
w,μa
0 ,... ,ζ
w,μa
d−1 form an orthonormal basis of Hd
χ with respect to the
inner product associated to || ∼ || w,μa , and we write ζ
w,μa
r = ∑r
j=0 γr,j · ζTCH
j ,t h e n∑r
j=0 |γr,j|2 ≤ 4,a n d
{
(r +1 )
9
2 · e4r+4 · a2r+1
}−1
≤| γr,r|≤ 2
Finally, if Im(τor) varies in a compact subset of the upper half-plane, then on that compact
subset, the wj are bounded above and below, i.e., there exist constants C1,C2 ∈ R>0
(depending only on the compact set) such that
Cd
1 ·| |∼| | 1,μa ≤| |∼| | w,μa ≤ Cd
2 ·| |∼| | 1,μa
where || ∼ || 1,μa is the norm deﬁned in the same way as || ∼ || w,μa except with all the
“weights” (i.e., “wj”) equal to1.
287

Proof. Most of the assertions of Theorem 2.3 have already been proven. Thus, it remains
only to check the following: The inequalities relating || ∼ || w,μa and || ∼ || Tch follow
from Lemmas 2.1, 2.2 (where in Lemma 2.1, we take “ A”t ob e a). The resulting bound∑r
j=0 |γr,j|2 ≤ 4 follows immediately. This implies |γr,r|≤ 2. The lower bound for
|γr,r| results from the elementary geometry of Hilbert spaces, together with the inequality
bounding || ∼ || w,μa in terms of || ∼ || Tch. ⃝
Remark. Thus, stated in words, Theorem 2.3 asserts the following:
Up to a factor of order Cr on the degree ≤ r portion of
Hd
χ = {P(δ∗
χ) · Θχ | deg(P(−)) <d }
the L2-norm on Hd
χ given by averaging the L2-norms on the α · μd
(as α varies over μa·d/μa,a n d a ≥ 8, d ≥ 25 are suﬃciently large)
with weights w0,... ,wd−1 induces orthonormal polynomials which are
essentially the discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials.T h u s , a sd →∞ ,t h e
orthonormal polynomials for this averaged L2-norm are essentially the
Legendre polynomials(cf. Chapter VII, Propositions 2.1, 3.1). Moreover,
if the elliptic curve in question varies on a compact set, then, up to a
factor of order C
d, we may even assume that the weights (i.e., the “wj”)
are all equal to 1.
Stated in this way, we feel that this theorem justiﬁes the terminology “ Legendre model”
used in the title of this§. Also, note that, as expected, the Legendre limit involves ascaling
factor of d, i.e., this limit is a slope 1 limit – cf. the discussions at the end of Chapter VII,
§3, 6. Finally, we remark that that if, on the other hand, one ﬁxesd and lets a →∞ ,t h e n
one veriﬁes easily that the norm with weights equal to 1, i.e.,
||f ||2
1,μa
= 1
d ·
d−1∑
j=0
a−1∑
j′=0
⏐⏐⏐
∑
k∈j+d·j′+˜d·Z
φk
⏐⏐⏐
2
converges (up to a constant factor) to the usual L2-norm on L2(S1). Thus, in this limit,
the resulting orthonormal functions converge (up to a constant factor) to the orthogonal
canonical Schottky-Weierstrass zeta functions ζOR,S1
r of Chapter VII, Deﬁnition 6.3.
288

§3. The Truncated Binomial Model
In this §, we discuss the analogue of the “truncated” (i.e., by comparison to|| ∼ || Tchϵ ,
|| ∼ || w,μa ) norm || ∼ || Tch of §2 for what we call the binomial model. In the case of the
Legendre model that we studied in §2, the truncated version was essentially isomorphic
to the system of discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials (cf. Chapter VII, §3), which is already
well-known. In the present binomial case, however, the truncated version is not so well-
known, so we give an independent treatment in the present§. This will prepare us for the
following two §’s, in which we study the function space of derivatives of the theta function
by regarding it as a deformation of the truncated binomial model (cf. what we did in §2–
i.e., we studied this same function space by regarding it as a deformation of the discrete
Tchebycheﬀ polynomials).
We maintain the notation of§2. In this §, we would like to consider aﬁltration on the
set K
Crit, deﬁned as follows. Recall the function “ Lr(T)= T + λr − iχ/n” of Chapter V,
Theorem 4.8. Then we deﬁne (for r =0 ,1,... ,d)
Fr(KCrit)
def
= {0 − λr,1 − λr,... ,r − 1 − λr }
Thus, Fr(KCrit)h a sr elements; F0(KCrit)= ∅; Fd(KCrit)= KCrit. Moreover, one checks
easily from the deﬁnitions that (for r =1 ,... ,d) Fr−1(KCrit) ⊆ Fr(KCrit). Thus, for
r =0 ,... ,d − 1
Fr+1(KCrit)\Fr(KCrit)
consists of precisely one element, which we denote by k[r]. Moreover, the ﬁltration
Fr(KCrit) induces a total ordering “ ≤Crit” on the set KCrit deﬁned by k ≤Crit k′ (for
k,k ′ ∈ KCrit)i f k′ ∈ Fr(KCrit)= ⇒ k ∈ Fr(KCrit)( f o ra l lr =1 ,... ,d). Put another way,
k[r1] ≤Crit k[r2] ⇐⇒ r1 ≤ r2
When the chosen character belongs to Case I (respectively, Case II; Case III), and r is
even (respectively, odd; either even or odd) Fr(KCrit) is the set of exponents of “ U”( c f .
Chapter V, Schola 4.1) of the ﬁrst r special monomials considered in Chapter V, Schola
4.1, where “ﬁrst” is relative to the ordering induced by the exponent of q.
Stated in a word, the purpose of the present and the next two §’s, is to study the
congruence canonical SW zeta functions(cf. Chapter V, Theorem 4.8)
ζCG
r
def
=
(Lr(δ∗)
r
)
(ζCG
0 )=
∑
k∈Z
(k + λr
r
)
· q
1
2 ·k2+(iχ /n)·k
sc · U2mk+iχ
cv · χ(ket)
289

at the inﬁnite prime (where, for simplicity, we omit mention of the “trivialization” θm).
In the present §, we would like to consider the following truncated versions of the ζCG
r :
ZCG
r
def
= q
− 1
2 ·k[r]2 −(iχ /n)·k[r]
sc ·
∑
k∈KCrit
(k + λr
r
)
· q
1
2 ·k2+(iχ /n)·k
sc · Uk
sc · χ(ket)
where Un
cv = Usc (note that we also divide by the unnecessary factor of Uiχ
cv ). Note that
the only nonzero terms of this sum over KCrit are those for which k/∈ Fr(KCrit). Thus,
the exponents of qsc are all nonnegative. In the following discussion, we shall write
Ψ(k)
def
= 1
2 · k2 + iχ
n k
for the function of k appearing in the exponent of qsc.I nt h i s§, we would like to think of
the space of linear combinations of the ZCG
r as equipped with the usual L2-norm || ∼ ||
on (S1)sc (i.e., the norm for which the Uk
sc (k ∈ Z) form an orthonormal system –c f . §1).
The purpose of the present § is to consider the following problem: Let
Z
def
=
d−1∑
r=0
γr · ZCG
r
be a C-linear combination (i.e., the γr ∈ C)o ft h eZCG
r .
Suppose that ||Z|| =1 . Then to what extent can one bound the gr
def
=
|γr |?
Since ||Z|| =1 ,a n dt h eUk
sc (k ∈ Z) form an orthonormal system, it follows that the coef-
ﬁcients of the Uk
sc (in the “Fourier expansion” of Z)a r e≤ 1. In particular, the coeﬃcient
of Uk[r]
sc is ≤ 1, hence:
⏐⏐⏐
r∑
j=0
γj ·
(k[r]+ λj
j
)
· qΨ(k[r])−Ψ(k[j])
sc · χ(k[r]et)
⏐⏐⏐ ≤ 1
Thus, if we write
C[r, j]
def
=
(k[r]+ λj
j
)
·| qsc|Ψ(k[r])−Ψ(k[j])
then we obtain
290

gr ≤ 1+
r−1∑
r1=0
C[r, r1] · gr1
(so in particular, g0 ≤ 1). If we then substitute into this last inequality the analogous
inequality for gr1 , we obtain
gr ≤ 1+
∑
r>r1≥0
C[r, r1]+
∑
r>r1>r2≥0
C[r, r1] · C[r1,r2] · gr2
Continuing in this fashion, we obtain
gr ≤ 1+
r∑
j=1
∑
r>r1>r2>...>rj ≥0
C[r, r1] · C[r1,r2] · ... · C[rj−1,rj]
(where we use that g0 ≤ 1, and that if r>r 1 > ... >r j ≥ 0, then j ≤ r). Next,
we would like to analyze this double summation in more detail. First, we would like to
estimate the number of terms appearing in this summation. By using the transformation
(r
1,r2,... ,rj) ↦→ (r − r1,r1 − r2,r2 − r3,... ,rj−1 − rj), one veriﬁes easily that the number
of terms in this double summation is ≤ the coeﬃcient of tr in the power series (1 − t)−r
(where t is an indeterminate). By taking the r-th derivative of (1− t)−r (and dividing by
r!), we obtain that this coeﬃcient is equal to
(2r−1
r
)
≤ 22r−1 ≤ 4r − 1. Thus, we obtain
that
The number of terms in the double summation above is ≤ 4r − 1.
Next, we would like to bound the C[r, r′]’s (where r′ <r ). This consists of two parts,
i.e., bounding the binomial coeﬃcient portion of C[r, r′], and bounding the power of |qsc|
appearing in C[r, r′].
Let us begin with the binomial coeﬃcient portion, i.e.,
(k[r]+ λr′
r′
)
of C[r, r′], where 0 ≤ r′ <r ≤ d − 1. First, let us observe that k[r′ − 1] + λr′ is either
0o r r′ − 1. Now one may check easily from the deﬁnitions that the interval of integers
Fr+1(KCrit) is obtained from interval of integersFr(KCrit) by adjoining one more integer
to Fr(KCrit), where this last integer lies either immediately to the left or immediately to
the right of Fr(KCrit). Moreover, whether this last integers lies to the left or to the right
depends only on the parity of r, i.e., as r increases, “left” and “right” occur alternately,
one after the other. Thus, it follows that k[r]+ λr′ is either ∈{ − 1
2 (r − r′ +2 ),... , −1}
or ∈{ r′,... ,r ′ − 1+ 1
2 (r − r′ +2 )}. But this implies that |
(k[r]+λr′
r′
)
| is ≤ a product of
291

1
2 (r − r′ +2 ) ≤ 2(r − r′) positive integers, each of which is ≤ r′ − 1+ 1
2 (r − r′ +2 )=
1
2 (r + r′) ≤ r. Thus, we obtain that:
The binomial coeﬃcient portion of C[r, r′] is ≤ r2(r−r′).I np a r t i c u l a r ,
the binomial coeﬃcient portion of the term
C[r, r1] · C[r1,r2] · ... · C[rj−1,rj]
in the double summation above is ≤ r2{(r−r1)+(r1 −r2)+...+(rj−1 −rj)} ≤
r2(r−rj).
Next, we would like to bound the power of |qsc|, i.e.,
|qsc|Ψ(k[r])−Ψ(k[r′])
appearing in C[r, r′]( w h e r e0≤ r′ <r ≤ d − 1). Since |qsc| < 1, this means that we would
like to bound Ψ(k[r])−Ψ(k[r′]) frombelow. N o t et h a tw ea l w a y sh a v eΨ (k[r])−Ψ(k[r′]) ≥ 0.
In the following, we would like to obtain a stronger bound from belowunder the assumption
that r ≥ r′ +6 .
Lemma 3.1. Suppose that r′ +6 ≤ r.T h e nΨ(k[r]) − Ψ(k[r′]) ≥ 1
16 (r + r′)(r − r′).
Proof. The proof consists of a case by case analysis, depending on which of the three
Cases I, II, III of Chapter V, Schola 4.1, the character χ belong to.
We begin with Case I. In this Case, r may be written as 2k or 2k +1( w h e r ek ≥ 0i s
an integer). Then Ψ(k[r]) = 1
2 (k2 + k) (cf. Chapter V, Schola 4.1). Let us write k′ for the
“ k” associated to r′.T h e n
Ψ(k[r]) − Ψ(k[r′])
r − r′ =
{ k − k′
2(r − r′)
}
· (k + k′ +1 ) ≥
{r − 1 − r′
4(r − r′)
}
·
(r + r′
2
)
≥
{ r − r′
8(r − r′)
}
·
(r + r′
2
)
= 1
16(r + r′)
as desired.
Next, we considerCase II. In this Case,r may be written as 2k or 2k − 1( w h e r ek ≥ 0
is an integer). Then Ψ( k[r]) = 1
2 · k2 (cf. Chapter V, Schola 4.1). Let us write k′ for the
“ k” associated to r′.T h e n
292

Ψ(k[r]) − Ψ(k[r′])
r − r′ =
{ k − k′
2(r − r′)
}
· (k + k′) ≥
{r − 1 − r′
4(r − r′)
}
·
(r + r′
2
)
≥
{ r − r′
8(r − r′)
}
·
(r + r′
2
)
= 1
16(r + r′)
as desired.
Finally, we consider Case III. In this Case, r may be written as 2k or 2k − 1( w h e r e
k ≥ 0 is an integer). Then Ψ( k[r]) is ≥ 1
2 (k2 − k), ≤ 1
2 (k2 + k) (cf. Chapter V, Schola
4.1). Let us write k′ for the “ k” associated to r′. Note that since r ≥ r′ +6 ,w eh a v e
r − r′ − 3 ≥ 1
2 · (r − r′), k ≥ k′ +2 . T h u s ,
Ψ(k[r]) − Ψ(k[r′])
r − r′ ≥
{k − k′ − 1
2(r − r′)
}
·
(k2 − k − (k′)2 − k′
k − k′ − 1
)
≥
{r − r′ − 3
4(r − r′)
}
· (k + k′)
≥
{ r − r′
8(r − r′)
}
·
(r + r′
2
)
= 1
16(r + r′)
as desired. ⃝
Thus, in particular, it follows that
The power of |qsc| appearing in the termC[r, r1]·C[r1,r2]·... ·C[rj−1,rj]
in the double summation above is
={Ψ(k[r]) − Ψ(k[r1])} + {Ψ(k[r1]) − Ψ(k[r2])}+
...+ {Ψ(k[rj−1]) − Ψ(k[rj])}
=Ψ(k[r]) − Ψ(k[rj])
which is ≥ 0 always and ≥ 1
16 (r + rj)(r − rj) if r ≥ rj +6 .
Lemma 3.2. We have
r ·
{
log(r) − 2r ·
(log2(d)
d
)}
≤ 12 · d
for any integer r satisfying 0 ≤ r ≤ d.
Proof. Lemma 3.2 is clear if r =0 ,1,2 (note that if r =1 ,2, then the expression in
brackets {, } is ≤ 1), or if r = d. Thus, we may assume that r ≥ 3 (so, in particular,
d ≥ 3). Write
293

f(r)
def
= r ·
{
log(r) − 2r ·
(log2(d)
d
)}
Since we have checked that f(r) ≤ 12 · d for r =2 ,d, it suﬃces (by elementary calculus)
to show that f(ρ) ≤ 12 · d for any real number ρ ∈ [2,d] such that f ′(ρ)=0 . F o rs u c ha
ρ,w eh a v e
3 · log(ρ) ≥ log(ρ)+1=4 ρ·
(log2(d)
d
)
(where we use that ρ ≥ 2 implies 2 · log(ρ) ≥ log(4) ≥ 1) hence
f(ρ)= ρ·
{
log(ρ) − 1
2 · (log(ρ)+1 )
}
≤ 1
2 · ρ· log(ρ)
Next, let us apply the function log2(−) to both sides of the inequality 3d
4·log2(d) ≥ ρ
log(ρ) (≥
1). Since both sides of this equality are ≥ 1, it thus follows that we obtain an inequality
log2(d) ≥ log2
{ 3d
4 · log2(d)
}
≥ log2
( ρ
log(ρ)
)
≥ 1
16 · log2(ρ)
(where we use that log( d) ≥ 1( s i n c ed ≥ 3), and ρ
log(ρ) ≥ ρ
1
4 (since ρ ≥ 2)). If we then
multiply the inequality log2(d) ≥ 1
16 · log2(ρ)b y 3d
4·log2(d) ≥ ρ
log(ρ), we thus obtain
3
4 · d ≥ log2(d) · 3d
4 · log2(d) ≥ 1
16 · log2(ρ) · ρ
log(ρ) = 1
16 · ρ· log(ρ)
i.e., f(ρ) ≤ ρ· log(ρ) ≤ 12 · d, as desired. ⃝
Now let us return to the inequality
gr ≤ 1+
r∑
j=1
∑
r>r1>r2>...>rj ≥0
C[r, r1] · C[r1,r2] · ... · C[rj−1,rj]
Suppose that qsc satisﬁes:
−log|qsc| =2 π · 1
d · Im(τor) ≥ 64 · log2(d)
d
Then by what we have done above (cf. especially Lemmas 3.1, 3.2), each term in the
double summation satisﬁes:
294

log(C[r, r1] · C[r1,r2] · ... · C[rj−1,rj]) ≤ 2(r − rj) · log(r)+ 1
16 · (r + rj)(r − rj) · log|qsc|
≤ 2(r − rj) · (log(r)+ 1
32 · r · log|qsc|)
≤ 2(r − rj) · (log(r) − 2 · r · d−1 · log2(d))
≤ 2(r − rj) · 12 · d
r ≤ 24 · d
when r ≥ rj + 6 and
log(C[r, r1] · C[r1,r2] · ... · C[rj−1,rj]) ≤ 2(r − rj) · log(r) ≤ 12 · log(r) ≤ 12 · log(d)
otherwise. Thus, since (as we saw above) there are 4r − 1 such terms in the above double
summation, (if we add in the additional “1+” at the beginning, so that we get a total of
4
r terms, then) it follows that
gr ≤ 4r · e24·d ≤ e26·d
Now we are ready to state the main result of the present §:
Theorem 3.3. Suppose that
Im(τor) ≥ 32
π · log2(d)
and let Z
def
= ∑d−1
r=0 γr · ZCG
r be a C-linear combination (i.e., the γr ∈ C)o ft h e ZCG
r .
Then
(1) If the |γr |≤ 1 for r =0 ,... ,d − 1, then the L2((S1)sc)-norm of Z
satisﬁes: ||Z|| ≤ d2 · ed ≤ e3d.
(2) If ||Z|| ≤ 1, then the |γr |≤ e26·d,f o rr =0 ,... ,d − 1.
In particular, if we orthonormalize the ZCG
r to form
ZOC
0 ,... ,Z OC
d−1
295

– which are unique if we stipulate that the leading coeﬃcient of ZOC
r (i.e., the coeﬃcient
of ZCG
r in the linear combination ofZCG
0 ,... ,Z CG
r that forms ZOC
r )b e positive – then the
coeﬃcients of the ZCG
r in each ZOC
r′ have absolute value ≤ e26d, and the absolute values of
the leading coeﬃcients are ≥ d−2 · e−d ≥ e−3d.
Proof. The assertion concerning theZOC
r at the end of Theorem 3.3 follows formally from
Assertions (1) and (2) (cf. the proof of Theorem 2.3). Assertion (2) is precisely what we
have just proven in the above discussion. Thus, it remains to verify Assertion (1). As we
saw above, the absolute value of the coeﬃcient of U
k[r]
sc (for k[r] ∈ KCrit)i n Z is
⏐⏐⏐
r∑
j=0
γj ·
(k[r]+ λj
j
)
· qΨ(k[r])−Ψ(k[j])
sc · χ(k[r]et)
⏐⏐⏐ ≤
r∑
j=0
⏐⏐⏐
(k[r]+ λj
j
) ⏐⏐⏐
Thus, since the cardinality of KCrit is d, it suﬃces to show that ∑r
j=0 |
(k[r]+λj
j
)
|≤ d · ed,
for all k[r] ∈ KCrit. Moreover, this last inequality will follow as soon as we show that
⏐⏐⏐
(k[r]+ λj
j
) ⏐⏐⏐ ≤ 2d ≤ ed
But this follows from the analysis of the “binomial coeﬃcient portion of C[r, r′]” in the
discussion above: Indeed, this analysis shows that there exists an integer N satisfying
j ≤ N ≤ j − 1+ 1
2 (r − j +2 ) ≤ r such that
⏐⏐⏐
(k[r]+ λj
j
) ⏐⏐⏐ =
(N
j
)
≤ 2N ≤ 2r ≤ er ≤ ed
as desired. ⃝
Remark. Thus, stated in words, Theorem 3.3 asserts that:
If Im(τor) ≥ 32
π · log2(d), then up to a factor of order Cd (for some
constant C), the L2((S1)sc)-norm on the complex vector space gener-
ated by ZCG
0 ,... ,Z CG
d−1, is the same as the norm for which the functions
ZCG
0 ,... ,Z CG
d−1 are orthonormal.
Note that unlike the case with Theorem 2.3, in the present situation, one does not have
the stronger result that the discrepancy is of order Cr on the subspace generated by
ZCG
0 ,... ,Z CG
r . Indeed, typically results such as Theorem 3.3, (2), (i.e., where one must
show that the coeﬃcients are bounded whenever theL2((S1)sc)-norm is bounded) are much
more diﬃcult than results such as Theorem 3.3, (1) (i.e., where one must show that if the
296

coeﬃcients are bounded, then the L2((S1)sc)-norm is bounded). But it is not diﬃcult to
check thateven in this easier direction(i.e., the direction of Theorem 3.3, (1))the binomial
coeﬃcients that one must bound do not satisfy ≤ Cr type inequalities.
§4. The Combinatorics of the Full Binomial Model
In this and the following §’s, we discuss what we call the (full) binomial model.T h i s
“full” binomial model is a deformation of the truncated binomial model studied in §3( c f .
especially Theorem 3.3) in essentially the same way as the “Legendre model” studied in
§2 (cf. especially Theorem 2.3) is a deformation of (what are essentially) the discrete
Tchebycheﬀ polynomials. One diﬀerence, however, between what we do in the present and
following §’s and what was done in §3 is that here, we do not use the averaging processof
§1. As a result, there are two types of deformation term that occur. The ﬁrst type results
from the fact that we do not use the averaging process of §1. This type will be dealt with
in the discussion of the semi-truncated binomial model below, and is the more diﬃcult to
handle (of the two types). The second type is exactly the same as the deformation terms
that occurred in “Case (ii)” of the proof of Lemma 2.1, and may be handled in exactly
the same way as in the proof of Lemma 2.1. Unfortunately, since our estimates of the ﬁrst
type of deformation term are very involved, we treat the combinatorial aspects of these
estimates in the present §. In the following §, we apply the results of the present§ to study
the orthogonal system which constitutes the “full binomial model.”
We maintain the notation of §3. Also, for simplicity, we assume in the following
discussion that
d ≥ 12
Let us write
K
Semi
def
= {k ∈ Z | ∃k0 ∈ KCrit s.t. |k − k0| = d, |k0 +( iχ/n)|≥ d
4,k · k0 < 0}
Thus, KSemi
⋂ KCrit = ∅,0 /∈ KSemi. In general, for k ∈ Z,l e tu sw r i t e
Crit(k)
for the (unique) k0 ∈ KCrit such that k ≡ k0 modulo d. Also, let us write
{k[d]}
def
= {0 − λd+1,1 − λd+1,... ,d − λd+1}\KCrit; Fd+1(KCrit)
def
= {k[d]}
⋃
KCrit
297

In the following discussion, if F is a ﬁnite subset of R,a n dλ ∈ R, then we shall write
Dist(λ,F )
def
=M i nf ∈F {|λ − f |}
for the “distance” between λ and F. Finally, we shall write
˜Ψ(λ)
def
=Ψ ( λ)+ 1
2 · (iχ/n)2 = 1
2 · (λ+( iχ/n))2
for λ ∈ R. Note that if r1 ≤ r2 (where r1,r2 are nonnegative integers≤ d), then Ψ(k[r1]) ≤
Ψ(k[r2]), ˜Ψ(k[r1]) ≤ ˜Ψ(k[r2]).
We would like to begin by introducing the “ semi-truncated version”o ft h eζCG
r , i.e.,
a function which is a sort of intermediate step between ζCG
r and ZCG
r :
ZCG
r
def
= q−Ψ(k[r])
sc ·
∑
k∈KCrit
⋃
KSemi
(k + λr
r
)
· qΨ(k)
sc · UCrit(k)
sc · χ(ket)
= ZCG
r + q−Ψ(k[r])
sc ·
∑
k∈KSemi
(k + λr
r
)
· qΨ(k)
sc · UCrit(k)
sc · χ(ket)
The key to understanding ZCG
r is the following analysis of the combinatorics of the sets
KCrit, KSemi:
Lemma 4.1. If A, B ∈ R, let us write [A, B]Int for the set of integers in the closed
interval [A, B] ⊆ R.L e tr ∈ [2,d]Int.T h e n
[
− (r − 2)
2 , (r − 2)
2
]
Int
⊆ Fr(KCrit)=[ −λr,r − 1 − λr]Int ⊆
[
− r
2, r
2
]
Int
In particular, for any k0 ∈ Fr(KCrit), we have |k0|≤ r
2,a n d r
2 ≥| k[r − 1]|≥ r−2
2 .
Finally, the average (or “center of mass”)Avg(Fr(KCrit)) of the elements of Fr(KCrit) is
1
2 (r − 1) − λr ∈{ 0, ±1
2 }.
Proof. Indeed, the number λr of Chapter V, Theorem 4.8, satisﬁes r
2 ≥ λr ≥ r−2
2 ≥ 0
(since r ≥ 2). Thus, Fr(KCrit)=[ −λr,r − 1 − λr]Int ⊆ [− r
2 , r
2 ]; Fr(KCrit)=[ −λr,r − 1 −
λr]Int ⊇ [− r−2
2 , r−2
2 ]. Since k[r − 1] ∈{ − λr,r − 1 − λr }, it thus follows that |k[r − 1]|≥
Min(λr,r − 1 − λr) ≥ Min(r−2
2 , r−2
2 )= r−2
2 . Finally, the statement concerning the average
follows immediately. ⃝
298

Lemma 4.2. Suppose that k ∈ Z\(KCrit
⋃KSemi).T h e n|k +( iχ/n)|≥ 3
4 d; |k|≥ 1
2 d.
Moreover, we have Ψ(k) − Ψ(k[d − 1]) ≥ 1
16 · d ·| k|.
Proof. Write k0
def
=C r i t (k). Since k/∈ KSemi,/∈ KCrit, it follows from the deﬁnitions that
at least one of the following holds: |k − k0|≥ 2d, or |k0 +( iχ/n)| < d
4 , or k · k0 ≥ 0.
Suppose that |k − k0|≥ 2d. By Lemma 4.1 above, we have |k0|≤ d
2 . Thus, it follows that
|k +( iχ/n)|≥ 2d −| k0|− 1
2 ≥ 2d − 1
2 d − 1
2 = 3
2 d − 1
2 ≥ 3
4 d (since d ≥ 1), as desired.
Next, let us assume that |k0 +(iχ/n)| < d
4 .W r i t ek = k0 +A ·d,w h e r eA ∈ Z, A ̸=0 .
Then |k +( iχ/n)|≥| A|· d −| k0 +( iχ/n)|≥ d − 1
4 d = 3
4 d, as desired.
Finally, let us assume that k · k0 ≥ 0. Write k = k0 + A · d,w h e r eA ∈ Z, A ̸=0 .
Then since |k0|≤ d
2 ≤ d − 1 (by Lemma 4.1, d ≥ 2), it follows that |A|· d ≥ d> |k0|.
Thus, k · k0 ≥ 0 implies that A · k0 · d ≥− k2
0, hence that A · k0 ≥ 0. In particular,
|k +( iχ/n)|≥| A · d + k0|− 1
2 ≥| A|· d − 1
2 ≥ d − 1
2 ≥ 3
4 d (since d ≥ 2), as desired.
This completes the proof of the assertion |k +( iχ/n)|≥ 3
4 d. This implies that |k|≥
|k +( iχ/n)|− 1
2 ≥ 3
4 d − 1
2 ≥ 1
2 d (since d ≥ 2). Now we compute (using this assertion,
together with the estimates of Lemma 4.1):
2(Ψ(k) − Ψ(k[d − 1 ] ) )=2 (˜Ψ(k) − ˜Ψ(k[d − 1 ] ) )=(k +( iχ/n))2 − (k[d − 1] + (iχ/n))2
= {|k +( iχ/n)| + |k[d − 1 ]+(iχ/n)|}
·{ |k +( iχ/n)|−| k[d − 1] + (iχ/n)|}
≥ 3
4d · (|k +( iχ/n)|− 1
2 −| k[d − 1]|)
≥ 3
4d · (|k +( iχ/n)|− 1
2(d +2 )+ 1
2)
≥ 3
4d · (|k +( iχ/n)|− 5
8d + 1
2) ≥ 3
4d · (1
6 |k +( iχ/n)| + 1
2)
≥ 1
8d · (|k +( iχ/n)| +3 ) ≥ 1
8d · (|k|− 1
2 +3 ) ≥ 1
8 · d ·| k|
(where we use d ≥ 8), as desired. ⃝
Lemma 4.3. Let k ∈ KSemi. Suppose that there exists some k[r] ∈ KCrit (where r ∈
[0,d −1]Int) such thatΨ(k)=Ψ ( k[r]).T h e nr = d−1, k = k[d], and the characterχ belongs
(in the language of Chapter V, §4) to Cases I or II. Moreover, under these hypotheses,
Crit(k)= k[d − 1], and (for any r′ <d − 1) we have Ψ(k[r′]) < Ψ(k[r]) = Ψ(k[d − 1]).W e
shall refer to such k as exceptional.
Proof. Indeed, this follows from the discussion of Chapter V, Schola 4.1. More precisely,
if χ belongs to Case III, then Ψ is injective on Z.T h u s ,χ must belong to Cases I or II.
299

It follows from the discussion of Chapter V, Schola 4.1, that the map r′ ↦→ Ψ(k[r′]) (for
r′ =0 ,... ,d)i s monotone increasing even in Cases I or II, and that the ﬁbers of the map
k′ ↦→ Ψ(k′)( f o rk′ ∈ Z) contain at most two elements. Moreover, sincek/∈ KCrit, it follows
that Ψ(k[d]) ≤ Ψ(k).
Now I claim that Ψ( k[d − 1]) = Ψ( k[d]). Indeed, if Ψ( k[d − 1]) < Ψ(k[d]), then it
follows that Ψ( k[r]) ≤ Ψ(k[d − 1]) < Ψ(k[d]) ≤ Ψ(k) (which contradicts the hypothesis
Ψ(k[r]) = Ψ(k)). This proves the claim.
Thus, since the ﬁbers of the map r′ ↦→ Ψ(k[r′]) (for r′ =0 ,... ,d) contain at most
two elements, it follows that for r′ =0 ,... ,d − 2, we have Ψ( k[r′]) < Ψ(k[d − 1]) =
Ψ(k[d]) ≤ Ψ(k). Thus, we conclude that r = d − 1. If k[d] ̸= k, then the fact that
the ﬁbers of the map k′ ↦→ Ψ(k′)( f o rk′ ∈ Z) contain at most two elements implies that
Ψ(k[r]) = Ψ(k[d− 1]) = Ψ(k[d]) < Ψ(k), which is absurd. Thus, we conclude thatk[d]= k.
Thus, it remains to prove that Crit(k)= k[d − 1]. But this follows from the explicit
analysis of Chapter V, Schola 4.1. Indeed, in Case I, since Ψ(k[d − 1]) = Ψ(k[d]), it follows
that d is odd,a n dt h a t|k[d] − k[d − 1]| =2 ·{ 1
2 (d − 1)} +1 = d. Similarly, in Case
II, since k[d − 1] = k[d], it follows that d is even,a n dt h a t|k[d]| = |k[d − 1]| = 1
2 d,s o
|k[d] − k[d − 1]| = d, as desired. This completes the proof. ⃝
Lemma 4.4. Suppose that k is exceptional (cf. Lemma 4.3). Write k0
def
=C r i t (k).
Then the coeﬃcient of Uk0
sc in ZCG
d−1 is a complex number whose absolute value is ≤ 2 and
≥ π
2m = π
n.
Proof. Recall the original nontruncated series
ζCG
r
def
=
(Lr(δ∗)
r
)
(ζCG
0 )=
∑
k′ ∈Z
(k′ + λr
r
)
· qΨ(k′)
sc · U2mk′+iχ
cv · χ((k′)et)
Now Iclaim that as k′ ranges overk0 +d·Z,t h eo n l yk′ (other than k0 = k[d−1]) for which
Ψ(k′)=Ψ ( k0) is the current exceptional k under consideration. Indeed, if k′ ∈ KCrit,t h i s
follows from Lemma 4.3. If k′ ∈ KSemi, then by Lemma 4.3, k′ = k[d]= k. Finally, if
k′ /∈ KCrit,/∈ KSemi, then by Lemma 4.2, Ψ( k′) > Ψ(k[d − 1]) = Ψ(k0). This completes
the proof of the claim.
Next, recall from Lemma 4.3 that Ψ(k[d − 1]) > Ψ(k[r]) for r<d − 1. It thus follows
that if we restrict the q−Ψ(k[r])
sc ·ζCG
r (for r =0 ,... ,d − 1)t o μd ⊆ (S1)sc,a n dl e tqsc → 0,
then the coeﬃcient of U2mk0+iχ
cv will be 0 for r<d − 1, and it will be equal (by the claim
of the preceding paragraph) to
∑
k′=k0,k
(k′ + λd−1
d − 1
)
· χ((k′)et)
300

for r = d − 1. Note that for k′ = k0,k ,w eh a v ek′ +λd−1 ∈{ −1,d − 1},s o
(k′+λd−1
d−1
)
= ±1.
Thus, the coeﬃcient in question will be a sum of two n-th roots of unity. This shows that
this coeﬃcient has absolute value ≤ 2. It also shows that if this coeﬃcient is nonzero, then
it has absolute value ≥ sin(2π/n)=s i n (π/m) ≥ π
2m (where the inequality may be proven
by elementary calculus, using the fact thatm ≥ 2). Moreover, it follows immediately from
the deﬁnitions that this coeﬃcient is the coeﬃcient referred to in the statement of Lemma
4.4.
Thus, it suﬃces to show that this coeﬃcient is nonzero. But since the corresponding
coeﬃcients in q
−Ψ(k[r])
sc · ζCG
r are 0 for r<d − 1, to say that the present coeﬃcient in
question is zero would imply that thecomparison isomorphism (Chapter VI, Theorem 4.1
– in fact, we only need it in characteristic zero, i.e., Chapter VI, Theorem 3.1) is false.
This contradiction completes the proof of Lemma 4.4. ⃝
Remark. The proof of Lemma 4.4 is interesting because it may be turned around and
regarded as an explicit way to verify the comparison theorem (Chapter VI, Theorem 4.1)
in a neighborhood of inﬁnity. That is to say, the fact that the coeﬃcient in question is
nonzero may also be proven by a direct computation (which is not diﬃcult, and is left as
an exercise for the reader). This direct computation may then be regarded as an alternate
proof of Chapter VI, Theorem 4.1, in a neighborhood of inﬁnity. Put another way, this
portion of the treatment of the archimedean theory in the present Chapter may be regarded
as the archimedean analogue of the description of the scheme-theoretic zero locus of the
determinant given in Chapter VI, Theorem 4.1, (2).
Lemma 4.5. Let k ∈ K
Semi.T h e n|k|≥ 1
2 d.
Proof. Write k0
def
=C r i t (k). Since |k − k0| = d,w eh a v e|k|≥ d −| k0|≥ d − 1
2 d = 1
2 d (by
Lemma 4.1). ⃝
Lemma 4.6. Let X, A,a n dB be nonnegative real numbers such that B ≥ A, B> 0.
Then (X + A) ≥ (A/B) · (X + B).
Proof. Indeed, B(X + A) ≥ B · X + A · B ≥ A · X + A · B = A(X + B). ⃝
Lemma 4.7. Let k ∈ KSemi. Write k0 = k[r0]=C r i t (k).L e tr be an integer satisfying
4 ≤ r ≤ d − 1.T h e n
Ψ(k) − Ψ(k[r]) ≥ 1
32n · d · Dist(k,F r(KCrit))
so long as either k is non-exceptional (cf. Lemma 4.3) or r<d − 1.
301

Proof. Write σk
def
= k/|k| (note that |k|≥ 1 > 0, by Lemma 4.5), k[r]∗ def
= −(iχ/n)+ σk ·
|k[r]+( iχ/n)|. By Lemma 4.1, |k[r]|≥ r+1
2 − 1 ≥ 1+ 1
2 . It thus follows that k[r]∗ has the
same sign as k,a n dt h a t|k[r]∗|≥ r+1
2 − 1 − 1= r−3
2 .
Write R ·Fr(KCrit) for the closed convex hull (inR) of the points inFr(KCrit). Note
that k/∈ Fr(KCrit), so k/∈ R ·Fr(KCrit); 0 ∈ R ·Fr(KCrit) (by Lemma 4.1). Observe that
k divides the real line into twoopen rays.N o wI claim that k[r]∗ lies in the same open ray
as R · Fr(KCrit). Indeed, if this were not the case, then since 0 ∈ R · Fr(KCrit), it would
then follow that |k[r]∗|≥| k|≥ 1. Since k[r]∗ and k have the same sign, it thus follows
that |k[r]∗+(iχ/n)|−| k[r]∗| = |k +(iχ/n)|−| k|, hence that |k[r]∗+(iχ/n)|≥| k +(iχ/n)|.
But this implies that
2 · ˜Ψ(k[r]) = (k[r]+( iχ/n))2 =( k[r]∗ +( iχ/n))2 ≥ (k +( iχ/n))2 =2 · ˜Ψ(k)
i.e., that Ψ( k[r]) ≥ Ψ(k). On the other hand, since k[r] ∈ KCrit, k/∈ KCrit,w eh a v e
Ψ(k[r]) ≤ Ψ(k). Thus, we conclude that Ψ(k[r]) = Ψ(k), so k is exceptional and r = d − 1,
contrary to the hypotheses of Lemma 4.7. This completes the proof of the claim.
Thus, k[r]∗ ̸= k lies to the same side of k as R · Fr(KCrit). Next, let us prove the
inequality
|k − k[r]∗|≥ 1
4n · Dist(k,F r(KCrit))
Indeed, if |k − k[r]∗|≥ Dist(k,F r(KCrit)), then this inequality follows immediately, so
we may assume that |k − k[r]∗| < Dist(k,F r(KCrit)), i.e., that k[r]∗ lies between k and
R · Fr(KCrit). Since k ̸= k[r]∗ and n · k,n · k[r]∗ ∈ Z, it follows that |k − k[r]∗|≥ 1
n .
On the other hand, Dist( k[r]∗,F r(KCrit)) = |k[r]∗ − k[r′]| for some r′ ∈{ r − 2,r − 1}
(i.e., k[r′] is the closest element ∈ Fr(KCrit)t o k[r]∗). Moreover, by Lemma 4.1, we have
r+1
2 +1 ≥| k[r]∗|≥ r−3
2 ; r
2 ≥| k[r − 1]|, |k[r − 2]|≥ r−3
2 > 0. Thus, in particular, it follows
that k[r′]a n dk[r]∗ have the same sign, so we obtain
Dist(k[r]∗,F r(KCrit)) = |k[r]∗ − k[r′]|
≤ Max
(1
2(r +3 ) − 1
2(r − 3), 1
2r − 1
2(r − 3)
)
=3
Thus, by Lemma 4.6 (where we take the quantity “ X + A” (respectively, “X + B”) of
Lemma 4.6 to be |k − k[r]∗| (respectively, Dist(k,F r(KCrit)))), we have
|k − k[r]∗|≥ 1
n ·
( 1
n +3
)−1
· Dist(k,F r(KCrit)) ≥ 1
4n · Dist(k,F r(KCrit))
302

This completes the proof of the inequality |k − k[r]∗|≥ 1
4n · Dist(k,F r(KCrit)).
Now we are ready to complete the proof of Lemma 4.7. Note that since either k is
non-exceptional or r<d − 1, we have Ψ( k) > Ψ(k[r]) (cf. Lemma 4.3). Also, by the
deﬁnition of k[r]∗, it follows that k[r]∗+( iχ/n)a n dk +( iχ/n) have the same sign. Thus,
we compute (using the inequality of the preceding paragraph, together with Lemma 4.5):
2(Ψ(k) − Ψ(k[r])) = 2(˜Ψ(k) − ˜Ψ(k[r])) = 2(˜Ψ(k) − ˜Ψ(k[r]∗))
=( k +( iχ/n))2 − (k[r]∗ +( iχ/n))2
=( |k +( iχ/n)| + |k[r]∗ +( iχ/n)|) · (|k +( iχ/n)|−| k[r]∗ +( iχ/n)|)
≥| k +( iχ/n)|·| k +( iχ/n) − k[r]∗ − (iχ/n)|
≥ (1
2d − 1
2) ·| k − k[r]∗|
≥ (1
4d) · 1
4n · Dist(k,F r(KCrit)) = 1
16n · d · Dist(k,F r(KCrit))
(where we use that d ≥ 2) as desired. ⃝
Finally, we need one more lemma in the style of Lemma 4.7, which is a sort of analogue
(in the present context) of Lemma 3.1 of §3:
Lemma 4.8. Let r>r ′ be nonnegative integers ≤ d − 1 such that
|k[r]+( iχ/n)|, |k[r′]+( iχ/n)|≥ d
4
and Ψ(k[r]) ̸=Ψ (k[r′]).T h e nΨ(k[r]) − Ψ(k[r′]) ≥ 1
32n · d · Dist(k[r],F r′
(KCrit)).
Proof. Write k
def
= k[r], k′ def
= k[r′], σk
def
= k/|k| (note that |k|≥| k+(iχ/n)|− 1
2 ≥ d
4 − 1
2 ≥
1 > 0, since d ≥ 6), (k′)∗ def
= −(iχ/n)+ σk ·| k′ +( iχ/n)|.S i n c e|k +( iχ/n)|, |k′ +( iχ/n)|≥
d
4 > 1, it follows that k,( k′)∗, k +( iχ/n), and (k′)∗ +( iχ/n)h a v et h esame sign.T h u s ,
|k+(iχ/n)|−| (k′)∗+(iχ/n)| = σk(k+(iχ/n)− (k′)∗− (iχ/n)) = σk(k − (k′)∗)= |k|−| (k′)∗|
On the other hand, since Ψ(k) > Ψ(k′)=Ψ ( (k′)∗), it follows that this diﬀerence of absolute
values is > 0, hence that
|k| > |(k′)∗|
303

Next, observe that λ1 = 0 (cf. Chapter V, Theorem 4.8). Thus, k[0] = 0, hence r, r′ ≥ 1
(since |k|, |k′|≥ d
4 − 1
2 ≥ 1). In particular, 0 ∈ F1(KCrit) ⊆ Fr′
(KCrit). On the other
hand, since r>r ′, k = k[r] /∈ Fr′
(KCrit). Thus, we conclude that (k′)∗ and Fr′
(KCrit) lie
to the same side of k (i.e., in the same connected component of R\{k}).
Note that the fact that 0∈ Fr′
(KCrit) also implies thatFr′
(KCrit)i snonempty.L e t u s
write k[r′′] for the unique element ofFr′
(KCrit) such that |k − k[r′′]| =D i s t (k,F r′
(KCrit)).
Then r′′ ∈{ r′ − 1,r ′ − 2}. Thus, by Lemma 4.1 (plus the fact that k[0] = 0), we have:
r′′ +1
2 ≥| k[r′′]|≥ r′′ − 1
2
On the other hand, again by Lemma 4.1, we have
r′ +1
2 ≥| k′| = |k[r′]|≥ r′ − 1
2
which implies that
r′ +3
2 ≥| (k′)∗|≥ r′ − 3
2
hence (since k[r′′] · k ≥ 0, (k′)∗ · k> 0) that
|(k′)∗ − k[r′′]|≤ Max(r′′ +1
2 − r′ − 3
2 , r′ +3
2 − r′′ − 1
2 )
≤ 1
2 · Max(r′′ − r′ +4 ,r ′ − r′′ +4 ) ≤ 3
Now we are ready to prove the inequality:
|k − (k′)∗|≥ 1
4n · Dist(k,F r′
(KCrit))
Indeed, without loss of generality, we may assume that |k − (k′)∗| < Dist(k,F r′
(KCrit)),
i.e., that (k′)∗ lies strictly betweenk and Fr′
(KCrit). Since k ̸=( k′)∗ and n ·k,n ·(k′)∗ ∈ Z,
it follows that |k − (k′)∗|≥ 1
n . On the other hand, |(k′)∗ − k[r′′]|≤ 3, so by Lemma 4.6,
we have
|k − (k′)∗|≥ 1
n · ( 1
n +3 )−1 ·| k − k[r′′]|≥ 1
4n ·| k − k[r′′]| = 1
4n · Dist(k,F r′
(KCrit))
as desired.
304

Thus, just as in Lemma 4.7, we have:
2(Ψ(k) − Ψ(k′)) = 2(˜Ψ(k) − ˜Ψ(k′)) = 2(˜Ψ(k) − ˜Ψ((k′)∗))
=( k +( iχ/n))2 − ((k′)∗ +( iχ/n))2
=( |k +( iχ/n)| + |(k′)∗ +( iχ/n)|) · (|k +( iχ/n)|−| (k′)∗ +( iχ/n)|)
≥ (|k +( iχ/n)|) ·| k +( iχ/n) − (k′)∗ − (iχ/n)|
≥ 1
4d ·| k − (k′)∗|
≥ 1
4d · 1
4n · Dist(k,F r′
(KCrit)) = 1
16n · d · Dist(k,F r′
(KCrit))
as desired. ⃝
§5. The Full Binomial Model
In this §, we apply the estimates of the preceding § to study the orthogonal system
which constitutes the full binomial model.
We maintain the notation of §4. We begin by considering the binomial coeﬃcients
that appear in the sum deﬁning ZCG
r .
Lemma 5.1. Let k ∈ Z, r ∈ [0,d − 1]Int (where [0,d − 1]Int
def
=[ 0 ,d − 1] ⋂Z is as in
Lemma 4.1). Then
⏐⏐⏐
(k + λr
r
) ⏐⏐⏐ =
(Dist(k,F r(KCrit)) +r − 1
r
)
In particular, log(
⏐⏐⏐
(k+λr
r
)⏐⏐⏐) ≤ Dist(k,F r(KCrit)) · log(|k| + d).
Proof. First, let us observe that in general, for any N ∈ Z,w eh a v et h eidentity
⏐⏐⏐
(N
r
) ⏐⏐⏐ =
(Dist(N, [0,r − 1]Int)+ r − 1
r
)
Indeed, this is clear for N ∈ [0,r − 1]Int (since both sides are zero). For N< 0, one checks
easily that |
(N
r
)
| =
(r−1−N
r
)
,D i s t (N, [0,r −1]Int)=D i s t (r −1−N, [0,r −1]Int), so it suﬃces
305

to prove the identity whenN ≥ r. But for N ≥ r,w eh a v eD i s t (N, [0,r −1]Int)= N −(r−1),
so the identity follows immediately.
Applying this identity, we obtain
⏐⏐⏐
(k + λr
r
) ⏐⏐⏐ =
(Dist(k + λr,[0,r − 1]Int)+ r − 1
r
)
=
(Dist(k, [0,r − 1]Int − λr)+ r − 1
r
)
=
(Dist(k,F r(KCrit)) +r − 1
r
)
by the deﬁnition of Fr(KCrit).
Finally, we note that the binomial coeﬃcient
(Dist(k,F r(KCrit))+r−1
r
)
may be bounded
by the product of Dist(k,F r(KCrit)) − 1( ≤ Dist(k,F r(KCrit))) integers all of which have
absolute value ≤| Dist(k,F r(KCrit)) +r − 1|≤| k − Avg(Fr(KCrit))| + |r − 1|≤| k| + 1
2 +
(d − 2) ≤| k| + d (by Lemma 4.1). ⃝
Let us write
KSemi
Crit
def
=C r i t (KSemi) ⊆ KCrit
Thus, (by the deﬁnition of KSemi)e v e r yk0 ∈ KSemi
Crit satisﬁes |k0 +( iχ/n)|≥ d
4 ≥ 3( s o
|k0|≥ 5
2 ), where we use that d ≥ 12. Also, if k[r] ∈ KSemi
Crit ,t h e nr ≥ 4 (indeed, if r ≤ 3,
then by Lemma 4.1, |k[r]|≤ r+1
2 ≤ 2). Let us write
RSemi
Crit
def
= {r ∈ [0,d − 1]Int | k[r] ∈ KSemi
Crit }
Next, let us observe that
KSemi
Crit = {k0 ∈ KCrit || k0 +( iχ/n)|≥ d
4 }
Indeed, “ ⊆” follows from the deﬁnition of KSemi. On the other hand, if |k0 +( iχ/n)|≥ d
4 ,
and σk0
def
= k0/|k0|, then (since |k0|≤ d
2 <d by Lemma 4.1, d ≥ 1) the integer k
def
=
k0 − σk0 · d satisﬁes k · k0 < 0, hence ∈ KSemi. This completes the proof of the above
observation. In the following, we shall write
Semi(k0)
def
= k0 − σk0 · d
In particular, since (for r ∈ [0,d − 1]Int) r ↦→| k[r]+( iχ/n)| = {2 · ˜Ψ(k[r])}
1
2 is (not
necessarily strictly) monotone increasing, it follows that RSemi
Crit is an interval of integers,
306

i.e., of the form [ r, d− 1]Int (where |k[d − 1 ]+( iχ/n)|≥ d−2
2 − 1
2 ≥ d
4 (by Lemma 4.1,
d ≥ 6) implies d − 1 ∈ RSemi
Crit ) for some integer r.
Next, we would like to deﬁne a matrix M
def
= {Mr,r′ } (where r, r′ ∈ RSemi
Crit )b y :
Mr,r′
def
=C o e ﬀUk[r′]
sc
(ZCG
r )
= q−Ψ(k[r])
sc ·
{(k[r′]+ λr
r
)
· qΨ(k[r′])
sc · χ(k[r′]et)
+
(Semi(k[r′]) +λr
r
)
· qΨ(Semi(k[r′]))
sc · χ(Semi(k[r′])et)
}
Let us write
M
def
= M0 + MSemi
where (M0)r,r′ is deﬁned to be the sum of all the terms in Mr,r′ in which the exponent of
qsc is zero; MSemi
def
= M − M0. More precisely, (by Lemma 4.3) ( M0)r,r′ can be nonzero
only when Ψ(k[r]) = Ψ(k[r′]). Moreover, when Ψ( k[r]) = Ψ(k[r′]), we have
(M0)r,r′ =
(k[r′]+ λr
r
)
· χ(k[r′]et)+ ϵ ·
(Semi(k[r′]) +λr
r
)
· χ(Semi(k[r′])et)
where ϵ
def
=1 i f r = r′ = d − 1 and Semi( k[d − 1]) = k[d]i s exceptional (cf. Lemma
4.3); and ϵ
def
= 0 otherwise. In the following discussion, we would like to show that (under
certain conditions) M admits a bounded inverse. We will do this by regarding MSemi as a
deformation of M0, i.e., we will ﬁrst study the inverse of M0 and then show that MSemi
is rather small.
We begin by considering M0. Note that since the ﬁbers of the map r ↦→ Ψ(k[r]) have
at most two (necessarily adjacent) elements, it follows that (M0)r,r′ can be nonzero only
in the cases r = r′ and r = r′ ± 1.
Now suppose that r = r′.T h e n w e h a v ek[r]+ λr ∈{ − 1,r },s o
(k[r]+λr
r
)
= ±1.
Similarly, if r = r′ = d − 1 and Semi( k[d − 1]) = k[d] is exceptional, then we have
Semi(k[r]) +λr ∈{ −1,d − 1},s o
(Semi(k[r′])+λr
r
)
= ±1. Thus,
(M0)r,r = ±χ(k[r]et) ± ϵ · χ(Semi(k[r])et)
(where the two “ ±’s” are not necessarily the same sign). Note that when r = r′ = d − 1
and k[d] is exceptional, (M0)r,r is precisely the coeﬃcient discussed in Lemma 4.4.
307

Next, suppose that r = r′ − 1. In this case, ϵ =0 . M o r e o v e r ,k[r′]= k[r +1 ] ∈
Fr+2(KCrit), so k[r′]+ λr ∈{ −1,r }.T h u s ,
(k[r′]+λr
r
)
= ±1, so we have:
(M0)r,r+1 = ±χ(k[r +1 ]et)
Note, moreover, that in this case, since Ψ( k[r]) = Ψ(k[r + 1]), and the ﬁbers of the map
r ↦→ Ψ(k[r]) have at most two elements, it follows that Ψ(k[r +1 ] )< Ψ(k[r + 2]), i.e., that
(M0)r+1,r+2 =0 .
Finally, suppose that r = r′ + 1. In this case, ϵ =0 . M o r e o v e r ,k[r′]= k[r − 1] ∈
Fr(KCrit), so k[r′]+ λr ∈ [0,r − 1]Int.T h u s ,
(k[r′]+λr
r
)
=0 ,s ow eh a v e :
(M0)r,r−1 =0
In particular, we conclude that (M0)r,r′ =0i f r>r ′ or r<r ′ − 1. In fact, this analysis
shows the following:
Lemma 5.2. The matrix M0 is of the form
⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝
∗ 0 0 ... 0
0 ∗ 0 ... 0
...
0 0 0 ... ∗
⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠
that is to say, zeroes away from the “diagonal” (i.e., the “ ∗’s”), where each “∗”i nt h e
diagonal is either a one-by-one matrix or an upper triangular two-by-two matrix. In par-
ticular, M0 itself is upper triangular. Moreover, the diagonal matrix elements of each
submatrix “ ∗” are either n-th roots of unity, or (in the case of (M0)d−1,d−1,w h e nk[d]
is exceptional) the coeﬃcient of Lemma 4.4. The oﬀ-diagonal elements of each submatrix
“ ∗”a r ea l ln-th roots of unity. Finally, M
0 is invertible, and the components of its inverse
M−1
0 are complex numbers of absolute value ≤ n
π .
Proof. All the statements except for the “Finally,...” follow immediately from the above
analysis. The “Finally,...” follows from the fact that each of the ∗’s are invertible, with
inverses bounded as stated. (Note that here we use the estimates of Lemma 4.4.) ⃝
Next, we would like to bound MSemi. By deﬁnition, MSemi consists of the terms of
308

Mr,r′ = q−Ψ(k[r])
sc ·
{(k[r′]+ λr
r
)
· qΨ(k[r′])
sc · χ(k[r′]et)
+
(Semi(k[r′]) +λr
r
)
· qΨ(Semi(k[r′]))
sc · χ(Semi(k[r′])et)
}
for which the exponent of qsc is nonzero. Thus, there are two cases (corresponding to the
two terms that appear in Mr,r′ ) to consider: (i) Ψ( k[r′]) ̸=Ψ (k[r]); (ii) Ψ(Semi( k[r′])) ̸=
Ψ(k[r]). We begin by considering case (ii). In this case, either Semi( k[r′]) is non-
exceptional, or r<d − 1. Moreover, (since r ∈ RSemi
Crit ) r ≥ 4. Thus, Lemma 4.7 implies
that
Ψ(Semi(k[r′])) − Ψ(k[r]) ≥ 1
32n · d · Dist(Semi(k[r′]),F r(KCrit))
Thus, since d + |Semi(k[r′])|≤ 2d + |k[r′]|≤ 5
2 · d ≤ d2 (by the deﬁnition of “Semi( −),”
Lemma 4.1, d ≥ 3), we have (by Lemma 5.1):
⏐⏐⏐
(Semi(k[r′]) +λr
r
)
· qΨ(Semi(k[r′]))−Ψ(k[r])
sc · χ(Semi(k[r′])et)
⏐⏐⏐
≤ e2·log(d)·Dist(Semi(k[r′]),Fr(KCrit)) ·| qsc|
d
32n ·Dist(Semi(k[r′]),Fr(KCrit))
= e(2·log(d)−Im(τor)· π
16n )·Dist(Semi(k[r′]),Fr(KCrit))
(where we use that log|qsc| = − 2π
d · Im(τor)). Also, let us observe that (since Semi(k[r′]) /∈
Fr(KCrit)), we have Dist(Semi(k[r′]),F r(KCrit)) ≥ 1.
Next, we consider case (i), i.e., the ﬁrst term in Mr,r′ when Ψ(k[r′]) ̸=Ψ (k[r]). Note
ﬁrst of all that this condition implies that r ̸= r′.M o r e o v e r , i fr>r ′,t h e nk[r′] ∈
Fr(KCrit), i.e., k[r′]+ λr ∈ [0,r − 1]Int,s o
(k[r′]+λr
r
)
=0 . T h u s ,it suﬃces to bound this
term when r<r ′. Note that since r, r′ ∈ RSemi
Crit ,w eh a v e|k[r]+(iχ/n)|, |k[r′]+(iχ/n)|≥ d
4 .
Thus, by applying Lemma 4.8 (note that “ r,” “r′” in Lemma 4.8 are the reverse of what
they are in the present discussion), we obtain
Ψ(k[r′]) − Ψ(k[r]) ≥ 1
32 · n · d · Dist(k[r′],F r(KCrit))
Thus, using Lemma 5.1 (and the fact that d + |k[r′]|≤ 3
2 · d ≤ d2, by Lemma 4.1, d ≥ 2)
as in the preceding paragraph, we obtain:
⏐⏐⏐
(k[r′]+ λr
r
)
· qΨ(k[r′])−Ψ(k[r])
sc · χ(k[r′]et)
⏐⏐⏐
≤ e2·log(d)·Dist(k[r′],Fr(KCrit)) ·| qsc|
d
32n ·Dist(k[r′],Fr(KCrit))
= e(2·log(d)−Im(τor)· π
16n )·Dist(k[r′],Fr(KCrit))
309

Also, let us observe that since r<r ′ (so k[r′] /∈ Fr(KCrit) ⊆ Fr′
(KCrit)), we have
Dist(k[r′],F r(KCrit)) ≥ 1.
Now let us assume that
Im(τor) ≥ {5 + (log(n)/log(d))}· 16
π · log(d) · n
Then it follows that
2 · log(d) − Im(τor) · π
16n ≤− { 3 + (log(n)/log(d))}· log(d)
+
(
{5 + (log(n)/log(d))}· log(d) − Im(τor) · π
16n
)
≤− { 3 + (log(n)/log(d))}· log(d)= −3 · log(d) − log(n)
In particular, it follows that both of the terms (cf. the treatment of cases (i), (ii) above)
which appear in the components of MSemi have absolute value ≤ e−3·log(d)−log(n) =( n ·
d3)−1. Thus, since there are two terms involved, we obtain the following result:
Lemma 5.3. If the condition
Im(τor) ≥ {5 + (log(n)/log(d))}· 16
π · log(d) · n
is satisﬁed, then the components of the matrix MSemi have absolute value ≤ 2
n·d3 .I n
particular, the components of the matrixM−1
0 · MSemi have absolute value ≤ d · n
π · 2
n·d3 ≤
d−2.
Proof. The statement concerning the absolute values of the components of MSemi was
proven in the above discussion. The statement concerning the absolute values of the
components of M−1
0 · MSemi follows from this estimate, plus the estimates of Lemma
5.2 (together with the fact that these matrices are square matrics of order equal to the
cardinality |K
Semi
Crit |≤| KCrit| = d of KSemi
Crit ). ⃝
Now we come to the invertibility of the original matrix M. Note that
M−1
0 · M
def
=1 + M−1
0 · MSemi
Write M′ def
= −M−1
0 · MSemi. Then by Lemma 5.3, the components of M′ have absolute
value ≤ d−2. Thus, for any nonnegative integer N, the components of (M′)N+1 will have
absolute value ≤ d−2 · (d · d−2)N = d−N −2 (where we again use the fact that |KSemi
Crit |≤
310

|KCrit| = d). Thus, the series ∑
N ≥0 (M′)N converges to a matrix whose components have
absolute value ≤ (1 − d−1)−1 ≤ 2. Moreover,
M−1 =
( ∑
N ≥0
(M′)N
)
· M−1
0
Thus, (applying the estimates of Lemma 5.2) we see that we have proven the following:
Lemma 5.4. Under the hypothesis of Lemma 5.3, the matrix M is invertible, and the
components of its inverse have absolute value ≤ 2 · d · n
π ≤ d · n.
Now we would like to consider theanalogous problem for theZCG
r to the problem that
we solved in §3 for the ZCG
r : Namely, let
Z
def
=
d−1∑
r=0
γr · ZCG
r
be a C-linear combination (i.e., the γr ∈ C)o ft h eZCG
r .
Suppose that ||Z|| =1 . Then to what extent can one bound thegr
def
= |γr |?
Since ||Z|| =1 ,a n dt h eUk
sc (k ∈ Z) form an orthonormal system in L2((S1)sc), it follows
that the coeﬃcients of the Uk
sc (in the “Fourier expansion” of Z)a r e ≤ 1. In particular,
for each r′ =0 ,... ,d − 1, the coeﬃcient of Uk[r′]
sc is ≤ 1. Thus, we would like to analyze
these coeﬃcients in a fashion similar to §3. Unfortunately, however, the present situation
is somewhat more complicated than in §3, so we must break the situation down into two
cases.
First, we consider the case r′ /∈ RSemi
Crit . This case is the simpler case since it may be
reduced to the results of §3. More precisely, let us observe that for r′ /∈ RSemi
Crit , there do
not exist any k ∈ KSemi such that Crit(k)= k[r′]. Thus, if we just look at the coeﬃcient
of Uk[r′]
sc , ZCG
r is exactly the same as ZCG
r . Thus, we obtain exactly the same inequalities
⏐⏐
⏐
r′
∑
r=0
γr ·
(k[r′]+ λr
r
)
· qΨ(k[r′])−Ψ(k[r])
sc · χ(k[r]et)
⏐⏐
⏐ ≤ 1
as in §3. Note that since r
′ ∈ RSemi
Crit ,a n yr ≤ r′ will also ∈ RSemi
Crit . Thus, for the r appearing
in this sum, we also get similar inequalities (obtained by considering the coeﬃcient ofUk[r]
sc ).
In particular, by the analysis of §3 (more precisely: by Theorem 3.3, (2)), we obtain the
following result:
311

Lemma 5.5. Suppose that Im(τor) ≥ 32
π · log2(d).T h e n|γr |≤ e26·d, for all r/∈ RSemi
Crit .
Next, we consider thecase r′ ∈ RSemi
Crit . This case is the more diﬃcult of the two cases.
First, let us observe that by looking at the coeﬃcient of Uk[r′]
sc , we obtain an inequality
⏐⏐⏐
d−1∑
r=0
γr · CoeﬀUk[r′]
sc
(ZCG
r )
⏐⏐⏐ ≤ 1
analogous to the one considered in the “ /∈ RSemi
Crit case.” Thus, under the hypothesis of
Lemma 5.5, we obtain
⏐⏐⏐
∑
r∈RSemi
Crit
γr · Mr,r′
⏐⏐⏐ =
⏐⏐⏐
∑
r∈RSemi
Crit
γr · CoeﬀUk[r′]
sc
(ZCG
r )
⏐⏐⏐
≤ 1+
⏐⏐⏐
∑
r/∈RSemi
Crit
γr · CoeﬀUk[r′]
sc
(ZCG
r )
⏐⏐⏐
≤ 1+ e26·d ·
∑
r/∈RSemi
Crit
⏐⏐⏐ CoeﬀUk[r′]
sc
(ZCG
r )
⏐⏐⏐
Now we have the following result:
Lemma 5.6. Let r ∈ [0,d − 1]Int, r′ ∈ RSemi
Crit .T h e n
⏐⏐⏐ CoeﬀUk[r′]
sc
(ZCG
r )
⏐⏐⏐ ≤ 23d−1.
Proof. Note that Ψ(Semi( k[r′])) ≥ Ψ(k[r]) always, and Ψ(k[r′]) ≥ Ψ(k[r]) if r ≤ r′.O n
the other hand, CoeﬀUk[r′]
sc
(ZCG
r )i sg i v e nb y
(k[r′]+ λr
r
)
· qΨ(k[r′])−Ψ(k[r])
sc · χ(k[r′]et)
+
(Semi(k[r′]) +λr
r
)
· qΨ(Semi(k[r′]))−Ψ(k[r])
sc · χ(Semi(k[r′])et)
where the ﬁrst term is zero if r>r ′ (since then k[r′] ∈ Fr′+1(KCrit) ⊆ Fr(KCrit), so
k[r′]+ λr ∈ [0,r − 1]Int). Since the exponents of qsc appearing in the nonzero term(s) are
≥ 0, we thus obtain that this coeﬃcient has absolute value ≤
⏐⏐⏐
(k[r′]+ λr
r
) ⏐⏐⏐ +
⏐⏐⏐
(Semi(k[r′]) +λr
r
) ⏐⏐⏐
≤
(Dist(k[r′],F r(KCrit)) +r − 1
r
)
+
(Dist(Semi(k[r′]),F r(KCrit)) +r − 1
r
)
≤ 2Dist(k[r′],Fr(KCrit))+d−2 +2 Dist(Semi(k[r′]),Fr(KCrit))+d−2 ≤ 22d−2 +2 3d−2
≤ 2 · 23d−2 =2 3d−1
312

(where we use Lemma 5.1, d ≥ 1, and the estimates
Dist(k[r′],F r(KCrit)) ≤| k[r′] − Avg(Fr(KCrit))|≤ d
2 + 1
2 ≤ d
and
Dist(Semi(k[r′]),F r(KCrit)) ≤| Semi(k[r′]) − Avg(Fr(KCrit))|≤| Semi(k[r′])| + 1
2
≤ d + |k[r′]| + 1
2 ≤ d + d
2 + 1
2 ≤ 2d
– cf. Lemma 4.1). ⃝
Thus, applying Lemma 5.6 in the above discussion, we obtain:
⏐⏐
⏐
∑
r∈RSemi
Crit
γr · Mr,r′
⏐⏐
⏐ ≤ 1+ e
26·d ·| [0,d − 1]Int\RSemi
Crit |· 23d−1 ≤ d · e26·d · 23d ≤ d · e29·d
On the other hand, by Lemma 5.4, M is invertible, and the components of M−1 have
absolute value ≤ d · n. Thus, we conclude that, under the hypothesis of Lemma 5.3 ,w e
have:
|γr |≤| RSemi
Crit |· (d · n) · d · e29·d ≤ n · d3 · e29·d ≤ n · e30·d
(since d ≤ e
1
3 ·d for d ≥ 6) for r ∈ RSemi
Crit . That is to say, we have proven the following
analogue for the ZCG
r of Theorem 3.3:
Theorem 5.7. Suppose that d ≥ 12,a n d
Im(τor) ≥ 32
π · log2(d)+ 80
π · n · log(d)+ 16
π · n · log(n)
and let Z
def
= ∑d−1
r=0 γr ·ZCG
r be aC-linear combination (i.e., theγr ∈ C)o ft h eZCG
r .T h e n
(1) If the |γr |≤ 1 for r =0 ,... ,d − 1, then the L2((S1)sc)-norm of Z
satisﬁes: ||Z|| ≤ d2 · e3d ≤ e4d.
313

(2) If ||Z|| ≤ 1, then the |γr |≤ n · e30·d, for all r =0 ,... ,d − 1,a n d
|γr |≤ e26·d if r/∈ RSemi
Crit .
In particular, if we orthonormalize the ZCG
r to form
ZOC
0 ,... , ZOC
d−1
– which are unique if we stipulate that the leading coeﬃcient of ZOC
r (i.e., the coeﬃcient
of ZCG
r in the linear combination of ZCG
0 ,... , ZCG
r that forms ZOC
r )b e positive – then the
coeﬃcients of the ZCG
r in each ZOC
r′ have absolute value ≤ n · e30d, and the absolute values
of the leading coeﬃcients are ≥ d−2 · e−3d ≥ e−4d.
Proof. Note that the hypothesis of Theorem 5.7 implies the hypotheses of Lemmas 5.3,
5.4, 5.5. The ﬁnal portion concerning the ZOC
r follows formally from (1), (2) (cf. the proof
of Theorem 3.3). Moreover, (2) is precisely what was proven above (cf. Lemma 5.5 for
the last part of (2)). Thus, it suﬃces to prove (1). To prove (1), it suﬃces to bound the
absolute value of the coeﬃcient of each U
k[r′]
sc in ZCG
r (for r, r′ =0 ,... ,d − 1) by e3d.F o r
r′ /∈ RSemi
Crit , (as discussed above) the ZCG
r look exactly the same as the ZCG
r , so we obtain
the estimate “ ≤ ed (≤ e3d)” as in the proof of Theorem 3.3. Forr′ ∈ RSemi
Crit , the coeﬃcient
of Uk[r′]
sc has absolute value ≤ e3d by Lemma 5.6 (cf. the proof of Theorem 3.3). This
completes the proof of (1). ⃝
It thus remains to deal with the discrepancy between ZCG
r and the original ζCG
r .T h i s
discrepancy may be dealt with exactly as in the proof of Lemma 2.1 in§2 (where we dealt
with deformations of the discrete Tchebycheﬀ polynomials). Indeed, let
ζCG,μ
r
def
=
∑
k∈Z
(k + λr
r
)
· qΨ(k)−Ψ(k[r])
sc · UCrit(k)
sc · χ(ket)
= ZCG
r +
∑
k∈Z\(KCrit
⋃
KSemi)
(k + λr
r
)
· qΨ(k)−Ψ(k[r])
sc · UCrit(k)
sc · χ(ket)
be the series obtained by restricting q−Ψ(k[r])
sc · U −iχ
cv · ζCG
r to μd ⊆ (S1)sc.L e t
ζμ def
=
d−1∑
r=0
γr · ζCG,μ
r
be a C-linear combination (i.e., the γr ∈ C)o ft h eζCG,μ
r . Moreover, let us assume that
314

Z
def
=
d−1∑
r=0
γr · ZCG
r
satisﬁes ||Z|| = 1. Then we would like to bound ||ζμ|| from above and below .I n t h e
following discussion, we assume that thehypotheses of Theorem 5.7 are satisﬁed.T h e nb y
Theorem 5.7, (2), we obtain
|γr |≤ n · e30·d
for r =0 ,... ,d − 1. On the other hand, by Lemma 4.2, for k ∈ Z\(KCrit
⋃KSemi), we
have |k|≥ 1
2 d,Ψ (k) − Ψ(k[d − 1]) ≥ 1
16 ·d ·|k|. Thus, (by Lemmas 4.1, 5.1, and the estimate
Dist(k,F r(KCrit)) ≤| k − Avg(Fr(KCrit))|≤| k| + 1
2 )w eh a v e :
⏐⏐⏐
(k + λr
r
)
· qΨ(k)−Ψ(k[r])
sc
⏐⏐⏐ ≤
(Dist(k,F r(KCrit)) +r − 1
r
)
·| qsc|Ψ(k)−Ψ(k[d−1])
≤ 2Dist(k,F r(KCrit))+r−1 ·| qsc|
1
16 ·d·|k| ≤ 2|k|+1
2 +d−2 ·| qor|
1
16 ·|k|
≤ 23·|k| ·| qor|
1
16 ·|k| ≤ e3·|k|− 2π
16 ·Im(τor)·|k| ≤ e|k|·(3− π
8 ·Im(τor))
Now let us assume that
C
def
= π
8 · Im(τor) − 3 ≥ 62 + 2
d · log(n)
Then it follows that
||ζCG,μ
r − ZCG
r || ≤
∑
k∈Z\(KCrit
⋃
KSemi)
⏐⏐⏐
(k + λr
r
)
· qΨ(k)−Ψ(k[r])
sc
⏐⏐⏐
≤
∑
k∈Z\(KCrit
⋃
KSemi)
e−C·|k|
≤ 2 ·
∑
k≥ 1
2 d
e−C·k
≤ 2 · e− 1
2 C·d · (1 − e−C)−1 ≤ 4 · e− 1
2 C·d
(since C ≥ 1 implies eC ≥ e ≥ 2, so (1 − e−C)−1 ≤ 2). Thus, since 1
2 C ≥ 31 + log(n)
d ,w e
have:
315

||ζμ − Z|| ≤
d−1∑
r=0
|γr |·| | ζCG,μ
r − ZCG
r ||
≤ d · (n · e30·d) · (4 · e− 1
2 C·d)
≤ 1
2 · n · ed·(31− 1
2 C)
≤ 1
2 · n · e−log(n) = 1
2
(where we use that d ≥ 4 implies 8d ≤ ed). Thus, since ||Z|| = 1, we obtain
1
2 ·| |Z|| = 1
2 ≤| | Z|| − || Z − ζμ|| ≤ || ζμ|| ≤ || ζμ − Z|| + ||Z|| ≤ 3
2 ≤ 2=2 ·| |Z||
This is the desired bound on ||ζμ||. Thus, we have proven the following result, which is
the main result of the present §:
Theorem 5.8. Suppose that d ≥ 12,a n d
Im(τor) ≥ 32
π · log2(d)+ 80
π · n · log(d)+ 16
π · n · log(n)+ 8
π · 65
and let ζ
def
= ∑d−1
r=0 γr · q−Ψ(k[r])
sc · ζCG
r be a C-linear combination (i.e., the γr ∈ C)o ft h e
q−Ψ(k[r])
sc · ζCG
r . Let us write
||ζ||et
for the L2(μd) norm (i.e., the norm for which U0
sc,U 1
sc,... ,U d−1
sc are orthonormal) of the
function (U −iχ
cv · ζ)|μd ⊆(S1)sc .T h e n
(1) If the |γr |≤ 1 for r =0 ,... ,d −1, then we have: ||ζ||et ≤ 2·d2 ·e3d ≤ e4d.
(2) If ||ζ||et ≤ 1, then the |γr |≤ 2n · e30·d, for all r =0 ,... ,d − 1,a n d
|γr |≤ 2 · e26·d if r/∈ RSemi
Crit .
In particular, if we orthonormalize the q−Ψ(k[r])
sc · ζCG
r to form
ζOC
0 ,... ,ζOC
d−1
– which are unique if we stipulate that the leading coeﬃcient of ζOC
r (i.e., the coeﬃcient
of ζCG
r in the linear combination of ζCG
0 ,... ,ζCG
r that forms ζOC
r )b e positive – then the
316

coeﬃcients of the ζCG
r in each ζOC
r′ have absolute value ≤ 2n ·e30d, and the absolute values
of the leading coeﬃcients are ≥ e−4d.
Proof. One checks easily that the hypothesis of Theorem 5.8 implies both the hypothesis
of Theorem 5.7, as well as the assumption
π
8 · Im(τor) − 3 ≥ 62 + 2
d · log(n)
made above. Then (1), (2) follow from the corresponding assertions of Theorem 5.7,
together with the inequalities
1
2 ·| |Z|| ≤ || ζμ|| ≤ 2 ·| |Z||
derived above (which hold even if ||Z|| ̸= 1). The assertions concerning the ζOC
r follow
formally from (1), (2) (cf. the proof of Theorem 5.7). ⃝
Remark. Thus, stated in words, Theorem 5.8 asserts that:
If Im(τor) is suﬃciently large (roughly ≥ the order of log2(d),w h e nn is
held ﬁxed), then up to a factor of order n · Cd (for some constant C),
the L2-norm on the complex vector space generated by theq−Ψ(k[r])
sc ·ζCG
r
(for r =0 ,... ,d − 1) is the same as the norm for which these functions
q−Ψ(k[r])
sc · ζCG
r (for r =0 ,... ,d − 1) are orthonormal.
Note that the factor of n in “n · Cd” is preciselythe archimedean analogue of the scheme-
theoretic zero locus of the determinantgiven in Chapter VI, Theorem 4.1, (2) (cf. also the
Remark following Lemma 4.4). In some sense, of the three models (Hermite, Legendre,
and Binomial) discussed, the (full) binomial model is the closest archimedean analogue to
what is done in Chapter VI at ﬁnite primes. Unfortunately, however, the estimates for the
binomial model only hold when the elliptic curve in question is fairly close to inﬁnity.T h i s
degree of proximity, i.e., log
2(d)w h e nn is held ﬁxed, is not so outrageously large in the
sense that, roughly speaking, Im(τor) should be regarded as being roughly on a par withd
in terms of size (cf. the discussion of “natural variables over F1” in Remark 2 at the end
of Chapter VII, §6). Thus, in some sense, to require that Im( τor) be at least of the order
of log2(d) is a “logarithmically weak” requirement on the proximity to inﬁnity.
317

§6. Relations Among Various Norms and Zeta Functions
In this §, we prepare for the discussion of theHodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism
in §7 below by relating the material of §1 through 5 of the present Chapter to the theory
of §4 through 6 of Chapter VII. That is to say, throughout Chapter VII and the present
Chapter, various canonical norms on function spaces, as well as various canonical zeta
functions were introduced. The reason that so many such objects were introduced was
because each one relates to a certain piece of the fundamental problem of relating the
natural metrics on the function spaces of “de Rham functions” and “´etale functions” to
one another (cf. the Introduction to Chapter VII). Thus, the purpose of the present § is
to explain how to put these pieces together.
We continue with the notation of §5. In addition, we suppose for simplicity that
d ≥ 25
Let us review the situation that we are in. First of all, we have our “original” elliptic
curve E
or
def
=( Gm)or/qZ
or, together with our “scaled” elliptic curve Esc
def
=( Gm)sc/qZ
sc,
where qor = e2πiτor , qsc = e2πiτsc , τor = d · τsc,a n d(Gm)or =( Gm)sc. Thus, we may think
of Esc as a quotient
Eor
def
=( Gm)or/qZ
or → Esc
def
=( Gm)sc/qZ
sc
of Eor. The pull-back morphism on diﬀerentials thus induces a natural isomorphism
ιdiﬀ : ωEor
∼= ωEsc
Note that this quotient map extends to a push-forward morphism on the universal exten-
sions of Eor, Esc:
0 −→ ωEor −→ E†
or −→ Eor −→ 0
⏐⏐↓d·ιdiff
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
0 −→ ωEsc −→ E†
sc −→ Esc −→ 0
One checks easily that the push-forward morphism induces the map d · ιdiﬀ on ωEor =
ωEsc . In the following discussion, we would like to think of τEor = ω∨
Eor (respectively,
τEsc = ω∨
Esc ) as the space of (linear) functions on the ωEor (respectively, ωEsc ) portion
of E†
or (respectively, E†
sc). From this “function-theoretic” point of view, we obtain an
isomorphism
ιfunc : τEsc → τEor
318

where ιfunc
def
=( d · ιdiﬀ)∨.
Next, we would like to consider various trivializations of τEor , τEsc . If we think of
Esc as the elliptic curve “ E” of Chapter VII, §4,5, then we have the trivialization “ θ∨”
(cf. Chapter VII, §4,5) of τEsc , which is determined up to multiplication by an element
∈ S1 ⊆ C× by the property that its norm with respect to the metric “|| ∼ || τ” of Chapter
VII, §4, is 1. Let us denote this trivialization by Θ DR,sc. Put another way, if we regard
Esc as the “ E” of Chapter VII, §4,5, then Θ DR,sc may be identiﬁed with the exterior
derivative of the function“ TDR” on Chapter VII,§4,5. Similarly, we have a metric “|| ∼ || τ”
(as in Chapter VII, §4) on τEor which gives rise to a trivialization Θ DR,or of τEor whose
norm is 1 and which may be normalized by requiring that it be a positive multiple of
Θ
DR,sc ∈ τEsc
∼= τEor (where “ ∼=”i se i t h e rι∨
diﬀ or ιfunc – both give the same result since
they diﬀer by a positive multiple). Since the metric “|| ∼ || τ” of Chapter VII,§4, is deﬁned
by integration, and integrating the pull-back toEor of a (1,1)-form onEsc diﬀers by a factor
of d from integrating the form onEsc, we thus obtain thatd
1
2 ·(ΘDR,or)∨ = ι−1
diﬀ((ΘDR,sc)∨),
which implies (by taking the dual) d− 1
2 · ΘDR,or = ι∨
diﬀ(ΘDR,sc), hence (by multiplying by
d
1
2 ):
ΘDR,or = d− 1
2 · ιfunc(ΘDR,sc)
On the other hand, in Chapter VII, §5, we also considered the trivialization “ ∂
∂log(U) ”
(where U is the standard coordinate on Gm), which gave rise to the function “ TSW”o f
Chapter VII, §5. Let us write Θ SW,sc (respectively, ΘSW,or) for the trivialization of ωEsc
(respectively, ωor) deﬁned by ∂
∂log(Usc) (respectively, ∂
∂log(Uor) ). If we think of the elliptic
curve “ E” of Chapter VII, §5, as being Esc, then one may also think of Θ SW,sc as the
exterior derivative of the function “ TSW” of Chapter VII,§5. In particular, it follows from
Chapter VII, Lemma 5.2, that
ΘDR,sc = {8π2 Im(τsc)}
1
2 · ΘSW,sc = d− 1
2 · Cor · ΘSW,sc
where Cor
def
= {8π2 · Im(τor)}
1
2 . Similarly,
ΘDR,or = Cor · ΘSW,or
Remark. One convenient way to keep track of the various trivializations introduced above is
to think of them asfunctions on the “ωEor (respectively, ωEsc ) portion” ofE†
or (respectively,
E†
sc), hence as linear functions (well-deﬁned up to some constant term, since E†
or, E†
sc are
torsors)o nt h ed-torsion points of E†
or (which map to the d-torsion points of E†
sc). From
this point of view, we see that (if we neglect the constant term, then) ΘSW,or (respectively,
ΘSW,sc) takes values ∈ 1
d · Z (respectively, ∈ Z)o nt h ed-torsion points (cf. Chapter III,
Corollary 5.9) of E†
or. Thus, in summary,the values taken (if we neglect the constant term)
by these functions (trivializations) on the d-torsion of E†
or are given by:
319

ΘSW,sc : ∈ Z ΘDR,sc : ∈ Cor
d
1
2
· Z
ΘSW,or : ∈ 1
d · Z ΘDR,or : ∈ Cor
d · Z
As we will see in the following discussion, these factors of d, d
1
2 that occur are related to
various scaling issues, of the sort discussed at the end of Chapter VII, §3.
Next, we would like toapply the theory of Chapter VII, §5, relating the de Rham and
Schottky-Weierstrass canonical zeta functions in the case where the elliptic curve “E”( o f
Chapter VII, §5) is Esc. First, let us write ( S1)sc ⊆ (Gm)sc for the copy of ( S1)sc in
(Gm)sc. Note that (S1)sc also injects intoEsc via the projection (Gm)sc → Esc.M o r e o v e r ,
(S1)sc ⊆ Esc lifts naturally (and uniquely!) to a closed subgroup ( S1)sc ⊆ E†
sc.T h u s ,
we may restrict the relations of Chapter VII, Theorem 5.3, to ( S1)sc ⊆ E†
sc. Note that
the functions “ TSW”a n d“ TDR” of Chapter VII, §5, are zero on (S1)sc ⊆ E†
sc.( T h i s
follows since the canonical sections of E†
sc → Esc used to deﬁne “ TSW”a n d“ TDR”a r e
continuous homomorphisms, hence map (S1)sc ⊆ Esc into (S1)sc ⊆ E†
sc.) Also, note that
although the theory of Chapter VII, §5, was only given in the case of a trivial character
χ, it generalizes immediately to the case of an arbitrary character χ (cf. Chapter IV,
§3, especially Theorems 3.2, 3.3), for instance, by “transport of structure” relative to
the automorphism of “ E” given by translating by an appropriate torsion point (cf. the
discussion immediately preceding Chapter VII, Theorem 6.7). Thus, by Chapter VII,
Theorem 5.3, we obtain (for r ∈ Z
≥0):
ζSS
r |(S1)sc = r!
dr · ζPD
r |(S1)sc = r!
Cror · d
r
2
·
[r/2]∑
m=0
(π · u)m
m! · ζDR
r−2m|(S1)sc
(where ζSS
r is as in Chapter VII, §6). Thus, in particular, if we think of ζSS
r as a section
of the line bundle Lχ
sc on Esc corresponding to χ (cf. Chapter VII, §6) over E†
sc,t h e nthe
leading term of ζSS
r , i.e., the image of ζSS
r in (Fr+1/Fr)(R
E†
sc
) ⊗OEsc Lχ
sc, is equal to a
unimodular multiple (i.e., S1 ⊆ C×-multiple) of
1
Cror · d
r
2
· Θ ⊗r
DR,sc = 1
Cror
· Θ ⊗r
DR,or =Θ ⊗r
SW,or
while the norm of ζSS
r with respect to the metric “ || ∼ || L2
DR
” of Chapter VII, §4,5, which
we denote here by || ∼ || DR,sc, satisﬁes (by Chapter VII, Corollary 5.4, and the fact that
1
dr ≤ 1
r! ):
||ζSS
r ||DR,sc ≤| |ζSS
0 ||DR,sc · eπ
r! ·
(8π · r · d
Im(τor)
)r
2
= ||ζSS
0 ||DR,sc · eπ ·
(8π
3
2
Cor
)r
· (r · d)
r
2
r!
320

Finally, by Chapter VII, Lemma 6.5 (where we take “ P(−)” to be 1, and change the
variable of integration from “k”t ox
def
= {2π
d · Im(τor)}
1
2 · k), we have:
||ζSS
0 ||2
DR,sc
= e
2π
d ·Im(τor)·(iχ /n)2
·
( 4π · d
8π2 · Im(τor)
)1
2
∫
R
e−x2
dx
= e
8π2
4πd ·Im(τor)·(iχ /n)2
· (4π · d)
1
2 · C−1
or · π
1
2 =2 π · (d/C2
or)
1
2 · e
(Cor·iχ /n)2
4πd
Thus:
||ζSS
r ||DR,sc ≤ 100 · (d/C2
or)
1
4 · e
(Cor·iχ /n)2
8πd · (50/Cor)r · (r · d)
r
2
r!
In the following discussion, we would like to think of the metric|| ∼ || DR,sc,a sw e l la s
the metrics || ∼ || Tch; || ∼ || w,μa of §2, as beingmetrics on the spaceΓ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc R
E†
sc
),
which we think of as the subspace
Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc R
E†
sc
) ↪→ L2((S1)sc)
(where the map “↪→ ” is obtained by dividing by the trivialization “Uiχ
cv ·θm”)generated by
ζSS
0 ,... ,ζSS
r ,. . . (i.e.,ζSS
0 and its derivatives).
On the other hand, let us write || ∼ || SS for the metric on Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc R
E†
sc
)f o r
which the ζSS
r are orthonormal. Then by Chapter VII, Theorem 5.3, we have:
( d
1
2
Cor
)r
· ζDR
r |(S1)sc =
[r/2]∑
m=0
dr−m · (−π · u)m
C2mor · m! · (r − 2m)! · ζSS
r−2m|(S1)sc
which shows that (for r<d )
( d
1
2
Cor
)r
·| |ζDR
r ||SS ≤ e3d ·
[r/2]∑
m=0
πm
C2mor
≤ e3d · r ·{ 1+( π/C2
or)}r
(where we use that
dr−m
m!(r − 2m)! ≤ dr−m
(r − m)! ·
(r − m
m
)
≤ 2r · dr−m
(r − m)!
≤ e2r · dr−m
(r − m)r−m ≤ e2r+d ≤ e3d
321

by Chapter VII, Lemmas 3.5, 3.6). Since, by Chapter VII, Corollary 4.6, Lemma 6.5, we
have:
||ζDR
r ||DR,sc ≥
((2π)r
r!
)1
2
·| |ζDR
0 ||DR,sc =
((2π)r
r!
)1
2
· e
(Cor ·iχ /n)2
8πd · (2π)
1
2 · (d/C2
or)
1
4
we obtain:
||ζDR
r ||−1
DR,sc ·| |ζDR
r ||SS ≤ e−
(Cor ·iχ /n)2
8πd · (r!)
1
2
(2π)
r
2
· (Cor/d
1
2 )r+1
2 · r ·{ 1+( π/C2
or)}r · e3d
≤ e−
(Cor ·iχ /n)2
8πd · (r! · d−r)
1
2
(Cor + π · C−1
or
(2π)
1
2
)r
· r · C1/2
or
d
1
4
· e3d
Thus, in summary:
Lemma 6.1. For r ≤ d, the metrics || ∼ || DR,sc, || ∼ || SS on Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc Fr(R
E†
sc
))
satisfy:
e
(Cor·iχ /n)2
8πd −3d · (dr/r!)
1
2 ·
( (2π)
1
2
Cor + π · C−1or
)r
· (d
3
4 · r · C1/2
or )−1 ·| |∼| | SS ≤| |∼| | DR,sc
≤ e
(Cor ·iχ /n)2
8πd · (r · d)
r
2
r! · (50/Cor)r · 100 · (d5/C2
or)
1
4 ·| |∼| | SS
Proof. This follows immediately from the above inequalities: Indeed, if||φ||SS ≤ 1( w h e r e
φ ∈ Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc Fr(R
E†
sc
))), then φ may be written as a linear combination of the
ζSS
r with complex coeﬃcients ≤ 1. Thus, ||φ||DR,sc may be bounded using the bound for
||ζSS
r ||DR,sc obtain above. Similarly, if ||φ||DR,sc ≤ 1, then φ may be written as a linear
combination of the ||ζDR
r ||−1
DR,sc · ζDR
r with complex coeﬃcients ≤ 1. Thus, ||φ||SS may be
bounded using the bound for ||ζDR
r ||−1
DR,sc ·| |ζSS
r ||SS obtain above. ⃝
Remark. Note that (for r ≤ d), we have:
(dr/r!)
1
2 · d−2 · e−3d ≥ e−4d
(r · d)
r
2
r! · d2 ≤ er · (r · d)
r
2
rr · d2 ≤ er · (d/r)
r
2 · d2 ≤ er · d2 · e
d
2 ≤ e2d
322

(cf. Chapter VII, Lemmas 3.5, 3.6), where we use that d2 ≤ e
d
2 since d ≥ 10. It thus
follows that:
If τor is restricted to vary in a compact subset of the upper half-plane,
then || ∼ || SS and || ∼ || DR,sc diﬀer from each other by a factor ≤
constant · e4d.
In fact, even if τor is not restricted to vary inside a compact set, the “constant” in this
statement is bounded by (some absolute constant)d times e
(Cor·iχ /n)2
8πd ·(Cor +C−1
or )d. Note,
in particular, that:
Despite the fact that the “leading term” ofζSS
r (cf. the above discussion)
goes like 1
Cror
· Θ ⊗r
DR,or =Θ ⊗r
SW,or, the absolute value of ζSS
r with respect
to || ∼ || DR,sc (a norm which is based on a ΘDR,sc-type scaling of R
E†
sc
,
not a ΘDR,or-type scaling!) goes (at least for compactly varyingIm(τor),
and up to a factor of constant · e4d)l i k e≈ 1.
This discrepancy of roughly a factor d
r
2 (when Im(τor) varies compactly) in the portion
of torsorial degree r, i.e., a scaling factor of d
1
2 , is the phenomenon of analytic torsion –
cf. Remark 1 following Chapter VII, Corollary 4.6, which concerns a factor of ( r!)
1
2 ≈ d
r
2
(as r → d) in the portion of torsorial degree r. This analytic torsion may be regarded as
the analogue at the inﬁnite prime of the factors of 1
r! that must be added to the integral
structure of the portion of torsorial degree r in the ﬁnite prime case (cf., e.g., Chapter V,
Theorem 3.1).
Next, we would like to recall from §2t h erelationship between || ∼ || SS and || ∼ || Tch.
First, let us recall from the ﬁrst part of the proof of Lemma 2.1 that if ||φ||Tch =1( f o r
φ ∈ Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc Fr(R
E†
sc
)), r ≤ d), then φ may be written as a linear combination of
the ζSS
r′ (where r′ <r ) with complex coeﬃcients of absolute value
≤ r
7
2 · e4r
Thus, we conclude that on Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc Fr(R
E†
sc
)) (where r ≤ d), we have:
|| ∼ || SS ≤ r
9
2 · e4r ·| |∼| | Tch
On the other hand, from the deﬁnition of || ∼ || Tch,w eh a v e
||ζSS
r ||2
Tch
= 1
d ·
d−1∑
j=0
⏐⏐⏐(j/d) − ld
⏐⏐⏐
2r
≤ 1
d ·
d−1∑
j=0
1=1
323

where ld is as in §2, hence satisﬁes 0 ≤ ld ≤ 1
2 . Thus, on Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc Fr(R
E†
sc
)) (where
r ≤ d), we have:
|| ∼ || Tch ≤ r ·| |∼| | SS
We summarize this as follows:
Lemma 6.2. For r ≤ d, the metrics || ∼ || Tch, || ∼ || SS on Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc Fr(R
E†
sc
))
satisfy:
r−1 ·| |∼| | Tch ≤| |∼| | SS ≤ r
9
2 · e4r ·| |∼| | Tch
while the metrics || ∼ || Tch, || ∼ || DR,sc on Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc Fr(R
E†
sc
)) satisfy:
e
(Cor ·iχ /n)2
8πd −3d · (dr/r!)
1
2 ·
( (2π)
1
2
Cor + π · C−1or
)r
· (d
3
4 · r2 · C1/2
or )−1 ·| |∼| | Tch
≤| |∼| | DR,sc
≤ e
(Cor ·iχ /n)2
8πd · (r · d)
r
2
r! · (e8/Cor)r · 100 · (d12/Cor)
1
2 ·| |∼| | Tch
Finally, the metrics || ∼ || w,μa (cf. §2), || ∼ || DR,sc on Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc Fr(R
E†
sc
)) satisfy:
e
(Cor ·iχ /n)2
8πd −3d · (dr/r!)
1
2 ·
( (2π)
1
2
e4 · a2 · (Cor + π · C−1or )
)r
· (d8 · C1/2
or )−1 ·| |∼| | w,μa
≤| |∼| | DR,sc
≤ e
(Cor·iχ /n)2
8πd · (r · d)
r
2
r! · (e8/Cor)r · 200 · (d12/Cor)
1
2 ·| |∼| | w,μa
where a is a positive integer satisfying a ≥ 8+( π
4 · Im(τor))−1.
Remark. Thus, stated in words, the above Lemma asserts that:
When Im(τor) varies compactly, || ∼ || DR,sc and || ∼ || w,μa diﬀer by at
most a factor of (constant)d.
Thus, || ∼ || DR,sc; || ∼ || SS; || ∼ || Tch; || ∼ || w,μa belong to “the same equivalence class”
– i.e., in the sense that when Im( τor) varies compactly, they diﬀer by at most a factor of
(constant)d.
324

Similarly, we may recall therelationship between || ∼ || SS and the ζCG
r , as follows. Let
us write
|| ∼ || CG (respectively, || ∼ || qCG)
for the metric on Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc Fd(R
E†
sc
)) for which theζCG
r (respectively, q−Ψ(k[r])
sc ·ζCG
r
– notation of §3,4,5), where r =0 ,... ,d − 1, are orthonormal. Recall from the proof of
Chapter VII, Lemma 6.2 (i.e., in essence, Chapter VII, Proposition 3.3), that ζCG
r is a
linear combination of ζSS
0 ,... ,ζSS
r with complex coeﬃcients of absolute value ≤ e2r+d.
Thus,
||ζCG
r ||SS ≤ (r +1 ) · e3d
In particular, on Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc Fr(R
E†
sc
)) (where r ≤ d), we have:
|| ∼ || SS ≤ r2 · e3d ·| |∼| | CG
On the other hand, if we consider a linear combination ofζCG
0 ,... ,ζCG
r whose || ∼ || Tch =
d−1, then we see that the issue of bounding the coeﬃcients of such a linear combination
is exactly the same as the situation considered in §3, except with |qsc| = 1. (Indeed,
note that if we set |qsc| = 1, then in the context of §3, || ∼ || Tch = d−1 means that the
usual L2((S1)sc)-norm of the corresponding linear combination of ZCG
0 ,... ,Z CG
r is = 1.)
Thus, by specializing what we did in §3 to the case where |qsc| =1 ,w es e et h a tt h e
coeﬃcients of this linear combination are bounded by a sum of 4r terms,e a c ho fw h i c h
has absolute value ≤ r2r (cf. the bounding of the “binomial coeﬃcient portion of the
C[r, r1] · C[r1,r2] · ... · C[rj−1,rj]” in §3). Thus, the coeﬃcients of the linear combination
under consideration have absolute value ≤ 4r · r2r. In particular, we obtain that on
Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc Fr(R
E†
sc
)) (where r ≤ d), we have:
|| ∼ || CG ≤ r · 4r · r2r · d ·| |∼| | Tch
Finally, the leading term ofζCG
r is equal to the leading term ofζPD
r . That is, in summary:
Lemma 6.3. For r ≤ d, the metrics || ∼ || CG, || ∼ || SS on Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc Fr(R
E†
sc
))
satisfy:
d−1 · 4−r · r−2r−2 ·| |∼| | CG ≤| |∼| | SS ≤ r2 · e3d ·| |∼| | CG
325

and (for 0 ≤ r ≤ d − 1) ζCG
r has the same leading term (i.e., image in Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc
(Fr+1/Fr)(R
E†
sc
)))a s dr
r! · ζSS
r . On the other hand, (for r ≤ d) the metrics || ∼ || CG,
|| ∼ || DR,sc on Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc Fr(R
E†
sc
)) satisfy:
e
(Cor ·iχ /n)2
8πd −3d · (dr/r!)
1
2 · r−2r−2 ·
( (2π)
1
2
4(Cor + π · C−1or )
)r
· (d2 · r · C1/2
or )−1 ·| |∼| | CG
≤| |∼| | DR,sc
≤ e
(Cor ·iχ /n)2
8πd · (r · d)
r
2
r! · (e7/Cor)d · 100 · (d7/Cor)
1
2 ·| |∼| | CG
and (for 0 ≤ r ≤ d − 1) ζCG
r has the same leading term (i.e., image in Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc
(Fr+1/Fr)(R
E†
sc
)))a s d
r
2
Cr
or ·r! · ζDR
r .
Remark. Thus, stated in words, the above Lemma asserts that:
When Im(τor) varies compactly, the ||ζCG
r ||DR,sc are bounded by a fac-
tor of (constant)d, but if one expands ζCG
r in terms of an orthonormal
basis for || ∼ || DR,sc, the resulting coeﬃcients have rather large absolute
values, i.e., of the order dconstant·d.
Put another way, whereas || ∼ || DR,sc; || ∼ || SS; || ∼ || Tch; || ∼ || w,μa belong to “the same
equivalence class”– i.e., in the sense that when Im(τor) varies compactly, they diﬀer by at
most a factor of (constant)d –t h em e t r i c|| ∼ || CG lies outside this equivalence class.T h a t
is to say, it is bounded below by metrics in this equivalence class, but not above. Moreover,
this obstruction to bounding it above by metrics in the said equivalence class arises not
from letting the elliptic curve in question degenerate, but from the combinatorial portion
of the coeﬃcients involved.
Finally, we consider the Hermite model.L e tu sw r i t e
|| ∼ || HMd
for the metric on Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc Fd(R
E†
sc
)) for which
||P(δ∗) · ζ0||2
HMd
def
=
∫
R
⏐⏐⏐P(s)
⏐⏐⏐
2
· e− 1
2 (s/γd)2
· ds
where γd
def
= {d/4π·Im(τor)}
1
2 (as in Chapter VII, Theorem 6.7). Thus, theζHMd
0 ,... ,ζHMd
d−1
(of Chapter VII, Theorem 6.7) are orthogonal for || ∼ || HMd ,a n d γ−1
d ·| |ζHMd
r ||2
HMd =
326

(2π)
1
2 · r!. Recall that the ζHMd
r are the canonical zeta functions associated to the (scaled)
Hermite polynomials
Hr(s/γd)
where Hr(−) is as in Chapter VII, Proposition 2.2. Let us write
|| ∼ || R,sc
for the metric on Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc Fd(R
E†
sc
)) denoted by || ∼ || L2(Esc) in Chapter VII, §6,
and by || ∼ || L2
R
in Chapter VII, §4. Note that
||ζSS
0 ||2
R,sc
= ||ζSS
0 ||2
DR,sc
= e
2π
d ·Im(τor)·(iχ /n)2
·
( d
4π · Im(τor)
)1
2
(2π)
1
2
=( 2π)
1
2 · γd · e
2π
d ·Im(τor)·(iχ /n)2
(cf. the discussion preceding Lemma 6.1), and
⏐⏐⏐
⏐⏐⏐
( r!
(2π)
r
2
)
· ζDR
r
⏐⏐⏐
⏐⏐⏐
2
R,sc
= r! ·| |ζDR
0 ||2
R,sc
=( 2π)
1
2 · r! · γd · e
2π
d ·Im(τor)·(iχ /n)2
(cf. Chapter VII, Theorem 4.5). Now, if we write
||ζ||et
(as in Theorem 5.8) for the L2(μd) norm (i.e., the norm for which U0
sc,U 1
sc,... ,U d−1
sc
are orthonormal) of the function ( U −iχ
cv · ζ)|μd⊆(S1)sc , then we obtain from Chapter VII,
Theorem 6.7, that:
Lemma 6.4. If we ﬁx a nonnegative integer r ≤ d and let d →∞ ,t h e no n
Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc Fr(R
E†
sc
)), we have:
lim
d→∞
γ
− 1
2
d ·| |∼| | et = lim
d→∞
γ
− 1
2
d ·| |∼| | HMd = lim
d→∞
γ
− 1
2
d ·| |∼| | R,sc
(where all three sides are ﬁnite )a n d|| ∼ || R,sc ≤| |∼| | DR,sc ≤ eπ+r ·| |∼| | R,sc.
327

Proof. Note that the inequalities relating || ∼ || R,sc and || ∼ || DR,sc result from Chapter
VII, Corollary 4.6 (for ρ=1 ) .⃝
§7. The Comparison Isomorphism at the Inﬁnite Prime
In this §, we complete the proof of a theorem, which is the main theorem of this paper,
concerning the behavior of the comparison isomorphism of Chapter VI, Theorem 3.1, at all
the primes of a number ﬁeld. The behavior of this comparison isomorphism at ﬁnite primes
is discussed in Chapter VI, Theorem 4.1; the behavior of this comparison isomorphism at
archimedean primes is the general topic of Chapter VII and the present Chapter. We
refer to the result which encompasses integrality issues at all primes of a number ﬁeld
as the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism (cf. the Introduction to this Chapter).
In the present §, we complete the archimedean portion of this result, which consists of
showing that the natural metrics on the function spaces of “de Rham functions” and
“´etale functions” are close to one another in three senses. These three senses correspond,
respectively, to the Hermite, Legendre, and Binomial Models treated in Chapter VII and
the present Chapter.
We continue with the notation of§5. Write L
χ
or
def
= Lχ
sc|Eor .T h u s ,Lχ
or is a line bundle
of degree d on Eor.L e t
G
def
= GLχ
or
be the theta group associated to this line bundle (cf. Chapter IV, §1). Let us write
GS1 ⊆G
for the maximal compact subgroup. Thus, we have an exact sequence
0 → S1 →G S1 → KLχ
or → 0
Note that the kernel of Eor → Esc, together with the line bundle Lχ
sc, deﬁne a Lagrangian
subgroup (cf. Chapter IV, the Remark following Theorem 1.4) H ⊆G . Suppose that V is
an irreducible C[G]-module (such that Gm ⊆G acts on V in the usual fashion). Thus, V
is a d-dimensional complex vector space, and the subspace of H-invariants V H ⊆ V is a
1-dimensional complex subspace. Let v ⊆ V H be nonzero.
Lemma 7.1. There exists a unique GS1 -invariant Hermitian metric (−, −) on V such
that (v,v )=1 .
328

Proof. Write KH ⊆ KLχ
or for the image of H in KLχ
or .L e t H′ ⊆G be a ﬁnite cyclic
subgroup of order d with the property that the image KH′ of H′ in KLχ
or is such that
KLχ
or = KH × KH′ . (It is not diﬃcult to see that such an H′ always exists – cf., e.g.,
Chapter IV, Example 1.2). Since V is irreducible, it follows (cf. Chapter IV, Example 1.2)
that
V =
⨁
g∈H′
C · g(v)
For g,g ′ ∈ H′ such that g ̸= g′, deﬁne ( g(v),g (v))
def
=1 ,( g(v),g ′(v))
def
=0 .T h i s g i v e s
us a well-deﬁned metric ( −, −)o n V . On checks easily that this metric is H′-invariant.
Because of the well-known structure of G, (cf. Chapter IV, §1), it follows that if g ∈ H,
g′ ∈ H′,t h e ng(g′(v)) = λ · g′(g(v)) = λ · g′(v), where λ ∈ S1 ⊆ C×. Thus, it is clear that
H also preserves this metric. Thus, it follows that this metric isGS1 -invariant. Uniqueness
follows from the fact that V is irreducible as an GS1 -module. ⃝
Lemma 7.2. Let {M;( −, −)M } be a pair consisting of a GS1 -module M and a GS1 -
invariant metric (−, −)M on M. Then the correspondence
{M;( −, −)M } ↦→{ MH;( −, −)MH
def
=( −, −)M |MH }
given by taking H-invariants is an equivalence of categories (cf. Chapter IV, Theorem 1.4)
between the category of ﬁnite dimensional (i.e., overC) C[GS1 ]-modules equipped withGS1 -
invariant Hermitian metrics and the category of ﬁnite dimensional complex vector spaces
equipped with Hermitian metrics.
Proof. Indeed, the functor “ ↦→ ” is clearly well-deﬁned. If {N;( −, −)N } is a ﬁnite di-
mensional complex vector space equipped with a Hermitian metric, and {V ;( −, −)V } is
a C[GS1 ]-module as in Lemma 7.1 equipped with the metric of Lemma 7.1 (relative to
some v ∈ V H), then N ⊗C V admits a natural structure of GS1 -module (where g ∈G S1
acts by g(α ⊗ β)= α ⊗ g(β), for α ∈ N, β ∈ V ), as well as a natural metric (obtained
by tensoring (−, −)N with (−, −)V ), which is clearly GS1 -invariant. Moreover, it is clear
that “ ↦→ ” associates {N ⊗ V ;( −, −)N ⊗V } to the pair {N;( −, −)N }. Since maps between
“ {N;( −, −)N }’s” clearly induce maps between “{N ⊗ V ;( −, −)N ⊗V }’s,” we thus see that
the functor “ ↦→ ” is full and essentially surjective. Faithfulness follows from Chapter IV,
Theorem 1.4. ⃝
Thus, applying Lemma 7.2 shows that the various metrics:
|| ∼ || DR,sc; || ∼ || R,sc; || ∼ || SS; || ∼ || Tch
329

|| ∼ || w,μa ; || ∼ || et; || ∼ || CG; || ∼ || qCG
on the space Γ(Esc, Lχ
sc ⊗OEsc Fd(R
E†
sc
)) that we discussed in§5, 6 naturally deﬁne metrics
on the space Γ(Eor, Lχ
or ⊗OEsc Fd(R
E†
sc
)). (By abuse of notation) we shall denote the
resulting metrics on Γ(Eor, Lχ
or ⊗OEsc Fd(R
E†
sc
)) by the same names.
Note that the morphism E†
or → E†
sc considered in §6 deﬁnes an isomorphism
E†
or,[d]
∼= E†
sc ×Esc Eor
(where E†
or,[d] is as in Chapter V, §2) which, if we identify ωEor with ωEsc via ιdiﬀ (cf.
the discussion at the beginning of §6), induces an isometry between ωEor ⊆ E†
or,[d] and
ωEor = ωEsc ⊆ E†
sc ×Esc Eor – i.e., both may be identiﬁed naturally with “d times theωEor ⊆
E†
or.” Thus, we may naturally identify Γ(Eor, Lχ
or ⊗OEsc Fr(R
E†
sc
)) with Γ(Eor, Lχ
or ⊗OEor
Fr(R
E†
or,[d]
)). Note, moreover, that these spaces Γ(Eor, Lχ
or ⊗OEor Fr(R
E†
or,[d]
)) are exactly
the spaces the appear in the domain of the evaluation map of Chapter VI, Theorem 4.1,
(2) (when applied to Eor).
Next, let us consider the action of Z on H
def
= {τ ∈ C | Im(τ) > 0} deﬁned by letting
1 ∈ Z act as τ ↦→ τ+1 . W r i t e
T∞
def
= H/Z
for the quotient of H by this action. Thus, the function q
def
=e x p ( 2πiτ) deﬁnes a biholo-
morphic isomorphism of T∞ with the punctured unit disk {z ∈ C | 0 < |z| < 1}.I n t h e
present context, we would like to think of T∞ as a covering space of the analytic stack
M
an
1,0 = H/SL2(Z) (where the quotient H/SL2(Z) is the quotient of H by the standard
action of SL2(Z) in the sense of analytic stacks).
Then let us observe thatas the moduli ofEor vary (i.e., where take “q” in the preceding
paragraph to beqor), the metrics deﬁned above all descend naturally fromH to T∞ . (Indeed,
this follows immediately from the deﬁnitions.) Moreover, I claim that:
The metrics || ∼ || DR,sc; || ∼ || R,sc; || ∼ || et descend naturally to M
an
1,0.
Indeed, || ∼ || R,sc is deﬁned by using the canonical real analytic section(κsc)R :( Esc)R →
(E†
sc)R (which deﬁnes a real analytic splitting of R
E†
sc
) to restrict sections of Lχ
sc over E†
sc
330

to sections over Lχ
sc. On the other hand, one checks easily (for instance, by considering
torsion points) that the canonical real analytic splitting ( κor)R :( Eor)R → (E†
or)R is
compatiblewith (κsc)R with respect to the natural morphismE†
or → E†
sc. Moreover, (κor)R
manifestly descends from H to M
an
1,0. On the other hand, the metric with translation-
invariant curvature on Lχ
sc (that was used in Chapter VII, §4) pulls back to a metric with
translation-invariant curvature on Lχ
or. Since metrics with translation-invariant curvature
are unique up to multiplication by a positive real number, we thus see that such a metric
descends from H to
M
an
1,0. Thus, in summary, all the ingredients used to deﬁne || ∼ || R,sc
descend naturally to M
an
1,0, so we conclude that || ∼ || R,sc itself descends naturally to
M
an
1,0.
Similarly, the only additional object used to deﬁne || ∼ || DR,sc is the metric on ωEsc
deﬁned in Chapter VII, §4, but this metric is equal to d− 1
2 times the analogously deﬁned
metric on ωEor (which manifestly descends to M
an
1,0) – cf. the discussion at the beginning
of §6 involving ΘDR,sc = d
1
2 · ΘDR,or.T h u s ,|| ∼ || DR,sc also descends naturally to M
an
1,0.
Finally, the metric on || ∼ || et on Γ(Eor, Lχ
or ⊗OEor Fr(R
E†
or,[d]
)) is clearly equal to the
metric obtained as follows: Since we have a natural inclusiondEor ⊆ E†
or,[d] of the d-torsion
points dEor of Eor in E†
or,[d],w em a yrestrict sections s ∈ Γ(Eor, Lχ
or ⊗OEor Fr(R
E†
or,[d]
)) to
dEor to obtain sections s|dEor ∈L χ
or|dEor .T h e n
||s||2
et = 1
d2 ·
∑
α∈dEor
|s(α)|2
(where |∼| is the chosen metric on Lχ
or with translation-invariant curvature), which
manifestly descends to M
an
1,0. This completes the proof of the claim.
Next, we pause to take a closer look at the metric || ∼ || R,sc on Γ(Eor, Lχ
or ⊗OEor
Fr(R
E†
or,[d]
)). Note that we have a natural surjection:
Γ(Eor, Lχ
or ⊗OEor Fr+1(R
E†
or,[d]
)) → Γ(Eor, Lχ
or ⊗OEor (Fr+1/Fr)(R
E†
or,[d]
))
=( d · τEor )r ⊗ Γ(Eor, Lχ
or)
Moreover, since all the metrics dealt with here areGS1 -invariant, it follows that, if we equip
d · τEor with its natural metric (i.e., the metric for which ΘDR,or has norm d−1), then the
metric induced by || ∼ || R,sc on (d ·τEor )r ⊗ Γ(Eor, Lχ
or)i se q u a lt osome constant times the
metric induced by || ∼ || R,sc on Γ(Eor, Lχ
or). By Chapter VII, Theorem 4.5, it follows that
this constant is (d−1 ·ΘDR,or/ΘDR,sc)r ·r! ·
(
(2π)r
r!
)1
2
.S i n c e(d−1 ·ΘDR,or/ΘDR,sc)r = d− 3r
2 ,
we thus obtain:
331

Lemma 7.3. We have:
Metric induced by || ∼ || R,sc on (d · τEor )r ⊗ Γ(Eor, Lχ
or)
= Metric induced by
((2π)r · r!
d3r
)1
2
·| |∼| | R,sc on Γ(Eor, Lχ
or)
Remark. The meaning of Lemma 7.3 is the following: We saw in Chapter VI, Theorem
4.1, that at ﬁnite primes , the necessary modiﬁcation to the integral structure of the space
“( d · τEor )r ⊗ Γ(Eor, Lχ
or)” that allows one to obtain an exact comparison isomorphism is
af a c t o ro f(r!)−1 (cf. Chapter V, Theorem 3.1). Thus, by the product formula, assuming
that the modiﬁcations to the integral structure are distributed evenly with respect to r,
one expects that the modiﬁcation to the integral structure to “ (d · τEor )r ⊗ Γ(Eor, Lχ
or)”
at the inﬁnite primes should be of the order of (r!)−1 ≈ (d!)−1 (as r → d) (cf. the
discussion of the “Fundamental Combinatorial Model” in Chapter VII, §3, especially the
proof of Proposition 3.4). On the other hand, Lemma 7.3 states that in fact, for the metric
|| ∼ ||
R,sc (hence also for || ∼ || DR,sc – by Lemma 6.4), the corresponding modiﬁcation to
the integral structure is roughly
((2π)r · r!
d3r
)1
2
≈ (d−3r · r!)
1
2 ≈ (d!)−1
(where we ignore factors of the order (constant)d)a s r → d. Moreover, let us recall that
these “modiﬁcations to the integral structure” are also known as analytic torsion.T h u s ,
in summary:
Lemma 7.3 asserts that for the metrics || ∼ || DR,sc, || ∼ || R,sc,t h e
resulting analytic torsion at the inﬁnite prime is roughly the same as
the analytic torsion that one would expect from applying the product
formula (of elementary number theory) to the analytic torsion at the
ﬁnite primes.
Put another way, Lemma 7.3 is theanalogue for general smooth elliptic curves of Chapter
VII, Proposition 3.4(which, in eﬀect, concerns “degenerate elliptic curves”). In particular,
Lemma 7.3 leads one to suspect that:
The metrics || ∼ ||
DR,sc, || ∼ || R,sc are natural (rough) candidates for(at
least the “combinatorial” or “arithmetic” portion – i.e., the portion that
does not arise from allowing the elliptic curve in question to degenerate
–o f ) the integral structure on
Γ(E
or, Lχ
or ⊗OEor Fd(R
E†
or,[d]
))
332

arising from the “´etale side” of the comparison isomorphism, i.e., the
metric || ∼ || et.
The extensive calculations of Chapter VII and the present Chapter imply thatthis intuitive
argument based on the product formula does, in fact, give the right answer:
Theorem 7.4. (The Comparison Isomorphism at the Inﬁnite Prime) Let
E
def
= Gm/qZ (where q =e x p ( 2πiτ) ∈T ∞ ) be an elliptic curve over C.L e t d, m ≥ 1 be
integers such that m does not divide d; write n
def
=2 m.L e t
L
def
= OE(d · [η])
where η ∈ E is a point of order equal to m. Write E†
[d] for the result of pushing forward
the universal extension E† → E of E by the map ωE → ωE given by multiplication by d.
Write dE ⊆ E for the subscheme of d-torsion points; thus, we have a natural inclusion
dE ⊆ E†
[d]. Consider the Comparison Isomorphism
Ξ:Γ ( E, L⊗ OE Fd(R
E†
[d]
)) ∼= L|dE
of Chapter VI, Theorem 4.1 (given by restriction sections of L over E†
[d] to dE ⊆ E†
[d]).
Choose a metric |∼| L on L whose curvature is translation-invariant. Let us regard L|dE
as equipped with the L2-metric deﬁned by |∼| L, i.e.:
||s||2 def
= 1
d2 ·
∑
α∈dE
|s(α)|2
for s ∈L | dE. Write || ∼ || et for the “ ´etale metric,” i.e., the metric on Γ(E, L⊗ OE
Fd(R
E†
[d]
)) induced by this L2-metric. On the other hand, the canonical real analytic
splitting κR : ER → (E†
[d])R (i.e., the unique continuous section which is a group homo-
morphism) deﬁnes a metric || ∼ || R on Γ(E, L⊗ OE Fd(R
E†
[d]
)) by restricting sections of
holomorphic sections of L over E†
[d] to real analytic sections of L over E, where one has
the L2-metric:
||s||2
R
def
=
∫
E
|κ∗
R(s)|2
L · dμ
(where s ∈ Γ(E, L⊗ OE Fd(R
E†
[d]
)),a n ddμ is the unique translation-invariant (1,1)-form
whose integral is 1). Finally, the section κR : ER → (E†
[d])R determines a real analytic
direct sum decomposition
(R
E†
[d]
)R ∼=
⨁
r≥0
τ⊗r
E ⊗O ER
333

(where the subscript “R’s” denote that the decomposition is in the real analytic category).
If we use this decomposition to writes ∈ Γ(E, L⊗ OE Fd(R
E†
[d]
)) as s = s[0] +s[ 1 ]+...+
s[r]+... , and, moreover, equip ωE with the metric given by:
||α||2 def
= d ·
∫
E
α ∧ α
then we obtain another metric, the “ de Rham metric ” || ∼ || DR,o n Γ(E, L⊗ OE
Fd(R
E†
[d]
)):
||s||DR
def
=
∑
r≥0
∫
E
|s[r]|2
L · dμ
(cf. Chapter VII, §4, for more details).
These metrics satisfy:
|| ∼ || R ≤| |∼| | DR ≤ eπ+r ·| |∼| | R
Moreover,
(1) (Hermite Model) If we ﬁx a nonnegative integer r ≤ d and let d →∞ ,t h e no n
Γ(E, L⊗ OE Fr(R
E†
[d]
)), we have:
lim
d→∞
γ
− 1
2
d ·| |∼| | et = lim
d→∞
γ
− 1
2
d ·| |∼| | HMd = lim
d→∞
γ
− 1
2
d ·| |∼| | R
Here γd
def
=
{
d
4π·Im(τ)
}1
2
,a n d|| ∼ || HMd is the metric on the space Γ(E, L⊗ OE Fr(R
E†
[d]
))
deﬁned by considering Hermite polynomials scaled byγd in the derivatives of the theta
functions ∈ Γ(E, L) (cf. §6 for more details on || ∼ || HMd ).
(2) (Legendre Model) There is a natural metric || ∼ || Tch on Γ(E, L⊗ OE Fd(R
E†
[d]
))
which admits a natural orthonormal basis obtained by consideringdiscrete Tchebycheﬀ
polynomials (cf. Chapter VII, Proposition 3.1) scaled by d in the derivatives of the
theta functions ∈ Γ(E, L) (cf. §2 for more details on || ∼ || Tch). In the limit, as d →∞ ,
with this scaling, these polynomials converge to theLegendre polynomials. Moreover, if
d ≥ 25, then for r ≤ d, the metrics || ∼ || Tch; || ∼ || DR on Γ(E, L⊗ OE Fr(R
E†
[d]
)) satisfy:
|q|− 1
2d ·(iχ /n)2
d3 · C1/2 · e5d · (C + C−1)r ·| |∼| | Tch ≤| |∼| | DR
≤
(e5 · d6
C
1
2
)
·
(e10
C
)d
·| q|− 1
2d ·(iχ /n)2
·| |∼| | Tch
334

where C
def
= {8π2 · Im(τ)}
1
2 . Moreover, if a is a natural number, then there is a natural
metric || ∼ || w,μa on Γ(E, L⊗ OE Fd(R
E†
[d]
)) obtained byaveraging || ∼ || et with respect to
translates by the a · d-torsion points of E = Gm/qZ arising from the torsion points of Gm
(cf. §1,2, for more details). The metrics || ∼ || w,μa ; || ∼ || DR on Γ(E, L⊗ OE Fr(R
E†
[d]
))
satisfy:
|q|− 1
2d ·(iχ /n)2
d8 · C1/2 · e9d ·{ a2 · (C + C−1)}r ·| |∼| | w,μa ≤| |∼| | DR
≤
(e6 · d6
C
1
2
)
·
(e10
C
)d
·| q|− 1
2d ·(iχ /n)2
·| |∼| | w,μa
whenever a ≥ 8+( π
4 · Im(τ))−1.
(3) (Binomial Model) There is a natural metric || ∼ || CG on Γ(E, L⊗ OE Fd(R
E†
[d]
))
which admits a natural orthonormal basis obtained by considering certainbinomial coef-
ﬁcient polynomials (cf. Chapter V, Theorem 4.8)(scaled by 1= d0) in the derivatives
of the theta functions ∈ Γ(E, L) (cf. §2 for more details on || ∼ || Tch). If d ≥ 25,f o r
r ≤ d,t h e nt h em e t r i c s|| ∼ || CG, || ∼ || DR on Γ(E, L⊗ OE Fd(R
E†
[d]
)) satisfy:
|q|− 1
2d ·(iχ /n)2
e3d · r2r · d5 · C1/2 ·{ 4π(C + C−1)}r ·| |∼| | CG ≤| |∼| | DR
≤
(e5 · d4
C
1
2
)
·
(e9
C
)d
·| q|− 1
2d ·(iχ /n)2
·| |∼| | CG
Moreover, there is a natural metric || ∼ || qCG on Γ(E, L⊗ OE Fd(R
E†
[d]
)) which admits a
natural orthonormal basis obtained bydividing the binomial coeﬃcient polynomials
in the derivatives of the theta functions considered above by certain powers of q.I f
d ≥ 12,a n dIm(τ) ≥ 200{log2(d)+ n · log(d)+ n · log(n)}, then this metric satisﬁes:
n−1 · e−32d ·| |∼| | qCG ≤| |∼| | et ≤ e4d ·| |∼| | qCG
In particular, for each of these models, the combinatorial/arithmetic portion of the
analytic torsion (i.e., the portion not arising from letting the elliptic curveE degenerate)
induced on Γ(E, L⊗ OE (Fr+1/Fr)(R
E†
[d]
)) by the metrics || ∼ || R; || ∼ || DR; || ∼ || HMd ;
|| ∼ || Tch; || ∼ || w,μa ; || ∼ || qCG (in their respective domains of applicability) as r → d,
goes (modulo factors of the order (constant)d)a s
≈ (d!)−1
335

which is precisely what you would expect by applying theproduct formula to the compu-
tation of the “analytic torsion” in the ﬁnite prime case (cf. Chapter V, Theorem 3.1;
Chapter VI, Theorem 4.1; Chapter VII, Proposition 3.4). Finally, all of the metrics ap-
pearing above on the spaceΓ(E, L⊗ OE Fr(R
E†
[d]
)) are invariant with respect to the maximal
compact subgroup GS1 ⊆G L of the theta group GL associated to L.
Proof. Note that relative to the discussion preceding Theorem 7.4, we replace Eor (re-
spectively, qor;D R,sc; R,sc) by the simpler notation E (respectively, q;D R ; R)i nt h e
statement of Theorem 7.4. The inequality relating || ∼ || R; || ∼ || DR follows from Lemma
6.4. The estimates of (1) (respectively, (2); (3)) follow by weakening/simplifying the es-
timates of Lemma 6.4 (respectively, Lemma 6.2; Lemma 6.3, Theorem 5.8). For stronger
estimates, we refer to the various estimates of§5, 6. (Note that to simplify these estimates,
we make use of Chapter VII, Lemmas 3.5, 3.6.) The statement concerning the relationship
between the analytic torsion and the comparison theorem at ﬁnite primes follows from
Lemma 7.3 and the Remark following Lemma 7.3. The statement concerning invariance
with respect to G
S1 follows from the deﬁnitions of the metrics using Lemma 7.2. ⃝
Remark. Note that the three models correspond roughly to three “domains of valid-
ity/applicability”:
Hermite Model (scaling factor = d
1
2 ) : nondegenerating E,ﬁ x e dr<d
Legendre Model (scaling factor = d) : nondegenerating E, varying r<d
Binomial Model (scaling factor = 1) : degenerating E
Relative to Im(τ)( w h e r eE = Gm/qZ, q =e x p ( 2πiτ)), the Hermite Model (respectively,
Legendre Model, Binomial Model) corresponds to the case where/is most useful when
Im(τ) is ﬁxed (respectively, → 0; →∞ ). Finally, as remarked at the end of §5, the factor
of n−1 appearing at the beginning of the last line of inequalities of Theorem 7.4, (3),
is the archimedean analogue of the description of the scheme-theoretic zero locus of the
determinant given in Chapter VI, Theorem 4.1, (2).
336

Chapter IX:
The Arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer Morphism
§0. Introduction
In this Chapter, we apply the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Theorem (Chapter VIII,
Theorem A) to construct an arithmetic version of the well-known Kodaira-Spencer mor-
phism of a family of elliptic curves E → S (satisfying a mild technical assumption con-
cerning its 2-torsion):
κarith
E :Π S → Filt(HDR)(S)
Roughly speaking, this arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism is a canonical map from the
algebraic fundamental group of SQ
def
= S ⊗Z Q (i.e., if S =S p e c (OK), where OK is the
ring of integers of a number ﬁeld K, then one may think of Π S as the absolute Galois
group of K) to a ﬂag variety of ﬁltrations of a module which is a certain analogue of thede
Rham cohomology of the elliptic curve. Moreover, this morphism has certain remarkable
integrality properties (in the Arakelov sense)at all the primes (both ﬁnite and inﬁnite) of
a number ﬁeld. This arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism is constructed in §3o ft h i s
Chapter. In §1,2, we ﬁrst give a construction of the Kodaira-Spencer morphism in the
complex and p-adic cases which is entirely analogous to the construction to be given in the
arithmetic case in §3, but which shows quite explicitly how this construction is related (in
the complex and p-adic cases) to the “classical Kodaira-Spencer morphism” that appears
in the theory of moduli of algebraic varieties. Conceptually speaking, the main point in
all of these constructions consists, as depicted in the following diagram:
Kodaira-Spencer morphism:
motion in base-space ↦→ induced deformation of Hodge ﬁltration
of the idea that the Kodaira-Spencer morphism is the map which associates to a “motion”
in the base-space of a family of elliptic curves, the deformation in the Hodge ﬁltration of
the de Rham cohomology of the elliptic curve induced by the motion. More concretely, the
main idea consists of a certain“recipe” for constructing “Kodaira-Spencer-type morphisms”
out of “comparison isomorphisms between de Rham and ´etale/singular cohomology.” In
§3, we carry out this recipe in the case when the comparison isomorphism is the the
Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism(Chapter VIII, Theorem A); in §1,2, we discuss
certain novel approaches to the well-known comparison isomorphisms for elliptic curves
337

in the complex and p-adic cases, which, on the one hand, make the connection with the
classical Kodaira-Spencer morphism explicit, and, on the other hand, show how the Hodge-
Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism is entirely analogous to the well-known complex and
p-adic comparison isomorphisms.
§1. The Complex Case:
The Classical “Modular Theory” of the Upper Half-Plane
In this §, we review the de Rham isomorphism of a complex elliptic curve, showing
how this isomorphism may be regarded as being analogous in a fairly precise sense to the
Comparison Isomorphism of Chapter VIII, Theorem A. We then discuss the theory of the
Kodaira-Spencer morphism of a family of complex elliptic curves in the universal case, but
we formulate this theory in a somewhat novel fashion, showing how the Kodaira-Spencer
morphism may be derived directly from the de Rham isomorphism in a rather geometric
way. This formulation will allow us to make the connection with the global arithmetic
theory of §3.
We begin our discussion by considering a singleelliptic curve E over C.F r e q u e n t l yi n
the following discussion, we shall also write “ E” for the complex manifold deﬁned by the
original algebraic curve. Recall (cf. Chapter III, §3) that we have a commutative diagram
H
1
DR(E, OE)= ˜E† ∼= H1
sing(E, C) ⊇ H1
sing(E, 2πi · R) ⊇ H1
sing(E, 2πi · Z)
⏐⏐↓exp
⏐⏐↓exp
⏐⏐↓exp
⏐⏐↓exp
H1
DR(E, O×
E )= E† ∼= H1
sing(E, C×) ⊇ H1
sing(E, S1)= ER ⊇ identity elt.
Here, the horizontal isomorphisms are thede Rham isomorphisms relating de Rham coho-
mology to singular cohomology. Note that in characteristic zero, line bundles with connec-
tion are necessarily of degree zero, so E† may be naturally identiﬁed with H1
DR(E, O×
E ),
the group of line bundles equipped with a connection on E. (Similarly, the (topological)
universal cover ˜E† of E† may be identiﬁed with H1
DR(E, OE).) The vertical maps are the
morphisms induced on cohomology by the exponential map; S1 ⊆ C× is the unit circle
(equipped with its usual group structure). Finally, ER ⊆ E† is the real analytic submani-
fold (discussed in Chapter III, §3) which is equal to the closure of the torsion points ofE†
and maps bijectively onto E via the natural projection E† → E.
Here, we would like to consider the issue of precisely how the de Rham isomorphisms
of the above diagram are deﬁned. Of course, there are many possible deﬁnitions for these
isomorphisms, but the point that we would like to make here is the following:
If one thinks ofH1
sing(E, S1)= ER (respectively,Tv(E)
def
= H1
sing(E, 2πi·
R))a st h e“ v-divisible group of torsion points of E” (respectively, the
338

“v-adic Tate module”) — where v = ∞ is the archimedean prime of Q
— then, roughly speaking, one may think of the de Rham isomorphisms
as being given by the diagram
Hol. fns. on H
1
DR(E, OE)= ˜E† “ ∼= ”R e a l a n. fns. on H1
sing(E, 2πi · R)
⋃⋃
Hol. fns. on H1
DR(E, O×
E )= E† “ ∼= ”R e a l a n. fns. on H1
sing(E, S1)= ER
where the horizontal isomorphisms “ ∼=” are given by restricting holo-
morphic functions on E† , ˜E† to real analytic functions on the “∞ -adic
torsion points/Tate module”ER, T∞ (E)
def
= H1
sing(E, 2πi · R).
Here, we say “roughly speaking” (and write “ ∼=”) for the following reason: Although this
restriction morphism isinjective, the correspondence between holomorphic functions on the
de Rham objects E† , ˜E† and real analytic functions on the v-adic torsion point objects
ER, T∞ (E) is, strictly speaking, only true on an “inﬁnitesimal neighborhood” ofER ⊆ E† ,
T∞ (E) ⊆ ˜E† . (That is to say, although a real analytic function onER always corresponds
to a holomorphic function on some open neighborhood of ER in E† , whether or not this
holomorphic function extends to a holomorphic function deﬁned over all of E† involves
subtle convergence issues and, in fact, is not always the case.) Thus, here, in order to get
a precise statement, we shall work withpolynomial functions on ˜E† and T∞ (E). Then one
sees immediately that the de Rham isomorphism of the ﬁrst commutative diagram of this
§ may be formulated as the isomorphism
HolomPoly( ˜E† ) ∼= Real AnPoly(T∞ (E))
given by restricting holomorphic polynomials on ˜E† to the ∞ -adic torsion points so as to
obtain real analytic polynomials onT∞ (E). When formulated from this point of view, one
sees that the Comparison Isomorphism of Chapter VIII, Theorem A, is analogous in a
very direct sense to the classical de Rham isomorphism in the complex case, i.e.:
Both may be thought of as being bijections between algebraic/ holomor-
phic functions on de Rham-type objects and arbitrary/ real analytic func-
tions on torsion points – bijections given by restricting algebraic/ holo-
morphic functions on de Rham-type objects to the torsion points lying
inside those de Rham-type objects.
This observation may be thought of as the philosophical starting point of the theory of
this paper.
339

Remark. Note that the collection of “holomorphic functions on H1
DR(E, OE)” includes, in
particular, the theta functions (cf., e.g., [Mumf], Chapter I, §3) associated to the elliptic
curve E. Moreover, these functions are “fairly representative of” (roughly speaking, “gen-
erate”) the set ofall holomorphic functions on H1
DR(E, OE) that arise by pull-back via the
projection H1
DR(E, OE) → H1(E, OE) (deﬁned by the Hodge ﬁltration) from holomorphic
functions on H1(E, OE). This observation played a fundamental motivating role in the
development of the theory of the present paper.
Next, we shift gears and discuss various versions of theKodaira-Spencer morphism for
the universal family of complex elliptic curves. First, let us write H
def
= {z ∈ C | Im(z) > 0}
for the upper half-plane, and
EH → H
for the universal family of complex elliptic curves over H.T h a t i s t o s a y , o v e r a p o i n t
z ∈ H, the ﬁber Ez of this family is given by Ez = C/< 1,z > (where < 1,z > denotes
the Z-submodule generated by 1,z ).
Let us ﬁx a “base-point” z0 ∈ H.W r i t e
H1
DR(Ez0 )
def
= H1
DR(Ez0 , OEz0
)
Thus, H1
DR(Ez0 ) is a two-dimensional complex vector space. Recall that, in fact, the
correspondence z ↦→ H1
DR(Ez) deﬁnes a rank two vector bundle E on H equipped with
a natural (integrable) connection (the “Gauss-Manin connection”). Since the underlying
topological space of H is contractible, parallel transport via this connection thus gives rise
to a natural trivialization of this rank two vector bundle E, i.e., a natural isomorphism
E ∼= H × H
1
DR(Ez0 )
Recall that theHodge ﬁltration of de Rham cohomology deﬁnes a subbundleF1(E) ⊆E
of rank one. This subbundle induces a natural holomorphic morphism
κH : H → P
def
= P1(H1
DR(Ez0 ))
that maps a point z ∈ H to the subspace of H1
DR(Ez0 )= H1
DR(Ez) deﬁned by F1(E) ⊆E
at z.
Now let us recall that we have a natural action of SL2(R)o n H given by linear
fractional transformations. This action allows us to deﬁne a morphism
κSL2 : SL2(R) → P
340

by letting κSL2 (γ)
def
= κH(γ · z0)( f o rγ ∈ SL2(R)). If we then diﬀerentiate κSL2 at z0,w e
obtain a morphism on tangent spaces that ﬁts into a commutative diagram:
sl2(R)
κsl2
−→ τP,p0
⏐⏐↓
↑⏐⏐ κτ
sl2(R)/so2 ∼= τH,z0
Here, the vertical morphism on top is the derivative of κSL2 at the origin of SL2(R);
τP,p0 (respectively, τH,z0
) is the tangent space to P (respectively, H)a t p0
def
= κH(z0)
(respectively, z0). This vertical morphism clearly factors through the quotient sl2(R) →
sl2(R)/so2,w h e r esl2(R) (respectively, so2) is the Lie algebra associated to SL2(R)( r e -
spectively, the subgroup ofSL2(R)t h a tﬁ x e sz0). Moreover, all tangent vectors to z0 ∈ H
are obtained by acting by various elements of sl2(R)o n H at z0; thus, one may identify
sl2(R)/so2 with τH,z0
(the vertical isomorphism on the bottom).
Deﬁnition 1.1. We shall refer to κSL2 (respectively, κsl2 ; κτ)a st h e group-theoretic
(respectively, Lie-theoretic; classical) Kodaira-Spencer morphism (of the family EH → H
at z0).
Thus, the “classical Kodaira-Spencer morphism”κτ is obtained (cf. the above commu-
tative diagram) simply by using the fact that κsl2 factors through the quotient sl2(R) →
sl2(R)/so2. One checks easily that this morphism is indeed the usual Kodaira-Spencer
morphism associated to the family EH → H.I np a r t i c u l a r ,κτ is an isomorphism.
The reason that we feel that it is natural also to regard κSL2 and κsl2 as “Kodaira-
Spencer morphisms” is the following: The essence of the notion of a “Kodaira-Spencer
morphism” is that of a correspondence that associates to a motion in the base-space the
induced deformation of the Hodge ﬁltration of the de Rham cohomology, i.e., symbolically,
Kodaira-Spencer morphism
:
motion in base-space ↦→ induced deformation of Hodge ﬁltration
In the case of the “group-theoretic Kodaira-Spencer morphism” (respectively, “Lie-theoretic
Kodaira-Spencer morphism”; “classical Kodaira-Spencer morphism”), this motion is a mo-
tion given by the “Lie group SL2(R) of motions of H” (respectively, the Lie algebra asso-
ciated to this Lie group of motions; a tangent vector in H). That is to say, all three types
of Kodaira-Spencer morphism discussed here ﬁt into the general pattern just described.
It turns out that the group-theoretic Kodaira-Spencer morphism is the version which
is most suited to generalization to the arithmetic case (cf. the discussions of §2,3 below).
Finally, we make the connection between the theory of the Kodaira-Spencer morphism
just discussed and the function-theoretic approach to the de Rham isomorphism discussed
341

at the beginning of this §. First of all, let us observe that the action of SL2(R)o n H lifts
naturally to an action onE. Moreover, if one thinks ofSL2(R) as the group of unimodular
(i.e., with determinant = 1) R-linear automorphisms of the two-dimensional R-vector
space T∞ (Ez0 ), that is, if one makes the identiﬁcation
SL2(R)= SL(T∞ (Ez0 ))
then the action of SL2(R)o n E ∼= H × H1
DR(Ez0 ) corresponds to the natural action of
SL(T∞ (Ez0 )) on H1
DR(Ez0 ) ∼= T∞ (Ez0 ) ⊗R C (where the isomorphism here is the de
Rham isomorphism). It thus follows that the group-theoretic Kodaira-Spencer morphism
κSL2 may also be deﬁned as the morphism
SL2(R)= SL(T∞ (Ez0 )) → P = P(H1
DR(Ez0 ))
given by γ ↦→ γ · p0, where the expression “ γ · p0” is relative to the natural action of
SL(T∞ (Ez0 )) on P = P(H1
DR(Ez0 )) ∼= P(T∞ (Ez0 ) ⊗R C) (where the isomorphism here
is that derived from the de Rham isomorphism). This approach to deﬁning κSL2 shows
that:
The group-theoretic Kodaira-Spencer morphismκSL2 may essentially be
deﬁned directly from the de Rham isomorphism.
This observation brings us one step closer to the discussion of the arithmetic case in
§3. In particular, in light of the above “function-theoretic approach to the de Rham
isomorphism,” it motivates the followingpoint of view:
Note that (in the notation of the discussion at the beginning of this §) the space
HolomPoly( ˜E† ) of holomorphic polynomials on ˜E† has a Hodge ﬁltration
... Fd(HolomPoly( ˜E† )) ⊆ ... ⊆ HolomPoly( ˜E† )
given by letting Fd(HolomPoly( ˜E† )) ⊆ HolomPoly( ˜E† ) denote the subspace of polynomi-
als whose “torsorial degree” (cf. Chapter III, Deﬁnition 2.2), i.e., degree as a polyno-
mial in the relative variable of the torsor ˜E† → ˜E (where ˜E is the universal covering
space of E), is <d . Note that relative to the “function-theoretic de Rham isomorphism”
HolomPoly( ˜E† ) ∼= Real AnPoly(T∞ (E)), Fd(HolomPoly( ˜E† )) corresponds to the subspace
of Real AnPoly(T∞ (E)) annihilated by ∂
d
. (Here, ∂ is the usual “del-bar” operator of
complex analysis on T∞ (E)= ˜ER, relative to the complex structure on ˜ER deﬁned by ˜E.)
Let us write
Filt(HolomPoly( ˜E† ))
342

for the (inﬁnite-dimensional) ﬂag-manifold of C-linear ﬁltrations {Fd}d∈Z≥0 of HolomPoly( ˜E† )
such that F0 = 0. Then the “Hodge ﬁltration” just deﬁned determines a point
pfunc
E ∈ Filt(HolomPoly( ˜E† ))
Similarly, any one-dimensional complex quotient˜E† → Q deﬁnes a ﬁltration of HolomPoly( ˜E† )
(given by looking at the degree with respect to the variable corresponding to the kernel of
˜E† → Q). In particular, we get an immersion
P( ˜E† ) ↪→ Filt(HolomPoly( ˜E† ))
Thus, returning to the discussion of the group-theoretic Kodaira-Spencer morphism,
we see that we may think of the composite
κfunc
SL2 : SL2(R)= SL(T∞ (Ez0 )) → Filt(HolomPoly( ˜E† ))
of κSL2 with the inclusion P( ˜E† ) ↪→ Filt(HolomPoly( ˜E† )) as being deﬁned as follows:
The natural action of SL(T∞ (Ez0 )) on Real AnPoly(T∞ (Ez0 )) induces,
via the “function-theoretic de Rham isomorphism”
Real AnPoly(T∞ (Ez0 )) ∼= HolomPoly( ˜E†
z0 )
an action ofSL(T∞ (Ez0 )) on HolomPoly( ˜E†
z0 ); then the“function-theoretic
version of the group-theoretic Kodaira-Spencer morphism”
κfunc
SL2 : SL(T∞ (Ez0 )) → Filt(HolomPoly( ˜E†
z0 ))
is deﬁned by γ ↦→ γ · pfunc
Ez0
,w h e r epfunc
Ez0
∈ Filt(HolomPoly( ˜E†
z0 )) is the
natural point deﬁned by the Hodge ﬁltration on HolomPoly( ˜E†
z0 ).
It is this point of view that forms the basis of our approach to the arithmetic case in §3.
Remark. The theory discussed in §1,2, of this Chapter generalizes immediately to the case
of higher-dimensional abelian varieties. Since, however, the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison
Theorem (Chapter VIII, Theorem A) is only available (at the time of writing) for elliptic
curves, we restrict ourselves both in the present and the following§’s to the case of elliptic
curves.
343

§2. The p-adic Case:
The Hodge-Tate Decomposition as an Evaluation Map
The purpose of this § is to exhibit the morphism which deﬁnes the Hodge-Tate de-
composition of the p-adic Tate module of an elliptic curve as an evaluation map,g i v e nb y
restricting certain functions on the universal extension of the elliptic curve to thep-power
torsion points of the elliptic curve. This renders explicit the analogy between the Hodge-
Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism of Chapter VIII, Theorem A, and the p-adic Hodge
theory of an elliptic curve. We then explain how, if one applies the general recipe–w h i c h
is the theme of the present Chapter – for obtaining Kodaira-Spencer-type morphisms from
evaluation map-based comparison isomorphisms (cf. §1 in the complex case and in §3i n
the global Arakelov case) to the present p-adic situation, one obtains a sort of “p-adic
arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism,”which, by Faltings’ computation of certain Galois
cohomology groups, may be identiﬁed with the classical Kodaira-Spencer morphism of a
family of elliptic curves.
Remark. The material of the present § is in principle “well-known,” and, in fact, inspired
by the techniques and points of view of [Falt1,2], [Font], but I do not know of an adequate
explicit reference for this material. Roughly speaking, the idea here is what is usually
referred to as the p-adic period map for abelian varieties – cf. [Coln], [Colz], [Wint].
Indeed, our point of view here essentially coincides with what is done in [Coln], [Colz],
[Wint], and [Font],when restricted to the subspace of the de Rham cohomology of an elliptic
curve arising from diﬀerentials of the ﬁrst kind (i.e., globally holomorphic diﬀerentials).
Our treatment of the “other half” of the de Rham cohomology, however, appears to diﬀer
from these other sources. Indeed, Coleman ([Coln]) and Fontaine ([Font]) do not construct
a morphism on the entire de Rham cohomology module. On the other hand, Colmez
([Colz], Th´eor`eme 5.2) constructs such a morphism by thinking of the remainder of the de
Rham cohomology as being deﬁned by diﬀerentials of the second kind (i.e., meromorphic
diﬀerentials which are “locally integrable”), which he integrates to construct his period
map; in particular, Colmez does not use the universal extension as we do here. Finally,
Wintenberger ([Wint], §4) uses the universal extension, but in a somewhat diﬀerent fashion
from what is done here.
Let k be a perfect ﬁeld of characteristic p> 2. (In fact, the case p =2m a yb e
handled without much more diﬃculty, but for simplicity, we assume here that p> 2.)
Write A
def
= W(k); K
def
= A ⊗Zp Qp.L e tS be a formal p-adic A-scheme, which is formally
smooth and formally of ﬁnite type over A. Suppose that S is equipped with an A-ﬂat
divisor with normal crossings D ⊆ S.W r i t eSlog for the resulting log scheme. Suppose
that
Clog → Slog
is a log elliptic curve over Slog (cf. Chapter III, Deﬁnition 1.1).
344

Next, let us suppose that S is aﬃne, i.e., of the form
Spf(R)
where R is a p-adic ring, and small (cf. [Falt2], II., (a.)), i.e., R is ´etale over the p-adic
completion A[t1,... ,tr]∧ of A[t1,... ,tr], where t1,... ,tr are indeterminates such that the
schematic zero locus of t
def
= t1 · ... · tr in S is equal to D.W r i t e
ˆR
for the p-adic completion of the normalization R of R in the maximal ´etale extension of
RQp [t−1]( w h e r eRQp
def
= R ⊗ Qp). (Here, “maximal” means “among those extensions
whose Spf is connected.”) Also, let us write
ΓR
def
= Gal(RQp /RQp )
Then as in [Falt2], II., (b.), we may form the ring of p-adic periods
B+(R)
This ring admits a natural ΓR-action, together with a ΓR-equivariant projection B+(R) →
ˆR whose kernel I is a “ principal divided power ideal.” In the discussion of the present §,
we will work with the following truncated version of B+(R):
B
def
= B+(R)/I[2]
(where I[2] is the second divided power of I). Write J
def
= I/I[2] ⊆ B for the image of I in
B. Thus, we have an exact sequence of ΓR-modules:
0 → J → B → ˆR → 0
Moreover, J is a free ˆR-module of rank 1. If one further takes the Γ R-action on J into
account, then one has a natural identiﬁcation (cf. [Falt2], II., (b.))
Zp(1) · ˆR = p
1
(p−1) · J
(where the “(1)” is a Tate twist). Put another way, there is a Γ R-equivariant homomor-
phism
βQp : Qp(1) → B×
345

whose projection to ˆR
×
is the natural inclusion Qp(1)/Zp(1) ↪→ ˆR
×
and whose restriction
to Zp(1) is equal to 1 plus the homomorphism β : Zp(1) → J.
Note that since ˆR contains all roots of the q-parameter at inﬁnity, we may form
E∞ → Spf( ˆR); C∞ → Spf( ˆR)
as in Chapter IV, §4. Note that we have a projection C∞ → C, and an open immer-
sion E∞ ↪→ C∞ . Thus, in particular, by pulling back via this projection and this open
immersion the extension to C (cf. Chapter III, Corollary 4.3)
E†
C → C
of the universal extension E† → E of E, we obtain
E†
∞ → Spf( ˆR); E†
C∞ → Spf( ˆR)
Next, let us recall that the universal extension E†
∞ deﬁnes a crystal E†
∞ ,crys (cf., e.g.,
[Mess], for the non-logarithmic case) over Spf(ˆR)log (where “log” refers to the natural log
structure deﬁned by roots of the q-parameter at inﬁnity). Since we may regard Spf( B)a s
a PD-thickening of Spf( ˆR)log, we thus see that it makes sense to speak of E†
∞ ,crys(B), or
even
E†
∞ ,crys(BQp )
where BQp
def
= B ⊗ Qp. In particular, we see that, for n ≥ 0,
pn E†
∞ ,crys(BQp ) ⊆ E†
∞ ,crys(BQp )
forms a group (noncanonically isomorphic to) ( Z/pn · Z)2. In fact, the sections of the
crystal E†
∞ ,crys deﬁned by pn E†
∞ ,crys(BQp ) are all horizontal, hence preserved by base-
changes of E†
∞ ,crys among various thickenings of BQp . Observe also that as n →∞ ,
the pn E†
∞ ,crys(BQp ) form a natural inverse system (all of whose transition morphisms are
surjective); the inverse limit of this inverse system is the Tate module
TE
of E. Note that as a topological group,TE ∼= Zp
2.M o r e o v e r ,TE has a natural structure of
continuous ΓR-module, and TE ⊗Z/pn · Z may be naturally identiﬁed withpn E†
∞ ,crys(BQp ).
346

Next, we would like to consider functions.L e tu sw r i t e
R
E†
∞
for the push-forward to E∞ of the structure sheaf O
E†
∞
on E†
∞ . Recall that this structure
sheaf has a ﬁltration Fj(R
E†
∞
) ⊆R
E†
∞
(for j ∈ Z), where we take Fj(R
E†
∞
)t ob et h e
subsheaf of sections of torsorial degree (cf. Chapter III, Deﬁnition 2.2) ≤− j. Note that
the ﬁltration index that we use here diﬀers from the ﬁltration index of Chapters III-VIII in
that “the index used here = 1− the index used there.” In particular, Fj(R
E†
∞
) as deﬁned
here is a vector bundle onE∞ of rank 1− j,w h e nj ≤ 0. Thus, we have an exact sequence:
0 −→ O E∞ −→ F −1(R
E†
∞ ˆR
) −→ τE ⊗OS O
E†
∞
−→ 0
In particular, if we apply this ﬁltration to the crystal E†
∞ ,crys evaluated on the thickening
B, where we regard B itself as equipped with the ﬁltration given by:
F ≥2(B)=0 ; F1(B)= J; F ≤0(B)= B
then we see that the sheaf R
E†
∞ ,crys(B)
of functions on E†
∞ ,crys(B) (pushed forward topo-
logically to E∞ ) gets a ﬁltration whose F0(−) we denote by
R0
If one restricts functions on E†
∞ ,crys(B)t o E†
∞ ,crys( ˆR)= E†
∞ ( ˆR), then one obtains a
surjection R0 →O E∞ which ﬁts into an exact sequence
0 −→ J ⊗ ˆR
F −1(R
E†
∞
) −→ R 0 −→ O E∞ −→ 0
Let us write
RJ def
= R0/J ·O E∞
Thus, we have an exact sequence
0 −→ (J ⊗R τE) ⊗ ˆR
OE∞ −→ R J −→ O E∞ −→ 0
347

The evaluation map that we will consider in this § (which gives rise to the comparison
isomorphism of Hodge-Tate theory) will be deﬁned by restricting functions in R0 to the
p-power torsion points pn E†
∞ ,crys(BQp ) (and then noting that this restriction map factors
through RJ).
More precisely, since sections of R0 are functions on E†
∞ ,crys(B), hence deﬁne func-
tions on E†
∞ ,crys(BQp ), we may restrict them to the points of pn E†
∞ ,crys(BQp )t oo b t a i na
morphism
ΞQp [pn]: R0 → Func(pn E†
∞ ,crys(BQp ),B Qp )
def
=
⨁
γ∈pn E†
∞ ,crys(BQp )
BQp
Now we have the following:
Lemma 2.1. The morphism ΞQp [pn] reduced moduloJQp ⊆ BQp maps into ˆR ⊆ ˆRQp .
Proof. Indeed, this follows from the deﬁnition ofR0, together with the fact that the image
of pn E†
∞ ,crys( ˆRQp )i nE∞ ( ˆRQp ) maps intoE∞ ( ˆR) ⊆ E∞ ( ˆRQp ) (i.e., all thep-torsion points
of E∞ over ˆRQp are already deﬁned over ˆR). ⃝
Thus, it follows that ΞQp [pn] maps J ·O(E∞ )ˆR
⊆R 0 into Func(pn E†
∞ ,crys(BQp ),J ) ⊆
Func(pn E†
∞ ,crys(BQp ),B Qp ). In particular, if we compose Ξ Qp [pn] with the projection
Func(pn E†
∞ ,crys(BQp ),B Qp ) → Func(pn E†
∞ ,crys(BQp ),B Qp/Zp )
(where BQp/Zp
def
= B ⊗ Qp/Zp) we get a morphism R0 → Func(pn E†
∞ ,crys(BQp ),B Qp/Zp )
which vanishes on the kernel of R0 →R J and maps into Func(pn E†
∞ ,crys(BQp ),J Qp/Zp ),
i.e., a morphism
ΞRJ [pn]: RJ → Func(TE ⊗ Z/pn · Z,J Qp/Zp )
(since TE ⊗ Z/pn · Z = pn E†
∞ ,crys(BQp )).
Let us analyze this morphism Ξ RJ [pn] in more detail. First, let us observe from
the deﬁnitions that R0 has a natural ring structure (inherited from the ring structure
of O
E†
∞ ,crys
). Moreover, it follows immediately from the deﬁnitions that the evaluation
map ΞQp [pn]i sa ring homomorphism. Note also that Func(TE ⊗ Z/pn · Z,J Qp/Zp ) has a
natural R0-module structure deﬁned by Ξ Qp [pn].
348

Lemma 2.2. The restriction R0 → Func(TE ⊗ Z/pn · Z,J Qp/Zp ) of ΞRJ [pn] to R0 is
a derivation.
Proof. Suppose that f,g are local sections of R0.W r i t e :
(ΞQp [pn])(f)= α0 + αJ;( Ξ Qp [pn])(g)= β0 + βJ
where α0,β0 ∈ B,a n d αJ ,βJ ∈ JQp . (Note that the fact that such α0,β0,αJ ,βJ exist
follows from Lemma 2.1.) Then since ΞQp [pn] is a ring homomorphism, we obtain that:
(ΞQp [pn])(fg)=( Ξ Qp [pn])(f) · (ΞQp [pn])(g)
=( α0 + αJ ) · (β0 + βJ)
= α0 · βJ + β0 · αJ + α0 · β0
But α0 · β0 ∈ B, so modulo B, we obtain:
(ΞQp [pn])(fg) ≡ α0 · βJ + β0 · αJ
≡ f · (ΞQp [pn])(g)+ g · (ΞQp [pn])(f)
This completes the proof. ⃝
Next, let us observe that the crystalE†
∞ ,crys gives rise to a crystal Ω
E†
∞ ,crys
(the sheaf
of diﬀerentials of E†
∞ ,crys over the base, i.e., thickening of ˆR, in question) of modules over
R
E†
∞ ,crys
(where R
E†
∞ ,crys
is the topological push-forward to E∞ of the structure sheaf of
E†
∞ ,crys). Let us denote by
Ωinv
E†
∞ ,crys
⊆ Ω
E†
∞ ,crys
the subsheaf ofinvariant diﬀerentials(cf. the discussion at the beginning of the Appendix).
Thus, Ωinv
E†
∞ ,crys
forms a crystal in (rank two) vector bundles over Spf( ˆR), and we have an
isomorphism of crystals:
Ωinv
E†
∞ ,crys
⊗R
E†
∞ ,crys
∼= Ω
E†
∞ ,crys
(where the tensor product is over the base, i.e., thickening of ˆR, in question). Note that
Ωinv
E†
∞
(i.e., Ωinv
E
†
∞ ,crys
evaluated on Spf(ˆR)) admits a natural two-stepHodge ﬁltration,w h o s e
349

F0 =Ω inv
E†
∞
; F2 =0 ;a n dF1 consists of the invariant diﬀerentialsωE on E∞ .( T h u s ,F0/F1
may be identiﬁed with τE.) Tensoring this ﬁltration with the ﬁltration discussed above on
R
E†
∞
gives rise to a ﬁltration on Ω
E†
∞
. Moreover, these ﬁltrations deﬁne ﬁltrations on the
evaluations (on various thickenings of Spf( ˆR)) of the corresponding crystals. Thus, if we
evaluate these crystals on Spf(B), we obtain:
F1(Ωinv
E†
∞ ,crys
)|Spf(B) ⊆ F1(Ω
E†
∞ ,crys
)|Spf(B) ⊆ Ω
E†
∞ ,crys
|Spf(B)
Note that we have a natural inclusion
F1(Ωinv
E†
∞
) ⊗ ˆR
Ker(R0 →O E∞ )) ↪→ F1(Ω
E†
∞ ,crys
|Spf(B))
Let us write
ΩJ
E†
∞
def
= F1(Ω
E†
∞
|Spf(B))/(F1(Ωinv
E†
∞
) ⊗ ˆR
Ker(R0 →O E∞ ))
ΩInv,J
E†
∞
def
=( F1/F2)(Ωinv
E†
∞
)|Spf(B)
Thus, we have a commutative diagram of ˆR-modules:
0 −→ J ⊗R τE −→ ΩInv,J
E†
∞
−→ ωE ⊗R
ˆR −→ 0
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
0 −→ (J ⊗R τE) ⊗ ˆR
OE∞ −→ ΩJ
E†
∞
−→ Ω
E∞ /ˆR
= ωE ⊗R OE∞ −→ 0
In particular, we see that we obtain a natural isomorphism
ΩInv,J
E†
∞
⊗ ˆR
OE∞
∼= ΩJ
E†
∞
On the other hand, it follows immediately from the deﬁnitions of the various ﬁltrations
that the exterior derivative d (over B)o n R
E†
∞ ,crys
|Spf(B) induces a morphism R0 →
F1(Ω
E†
∞
|Spf(B)), hence (by projecting) a morphism
R0 → ΩJ
E†
∞
350

which is easily seen to vanish on J ·O (E∞ )ˆR
. Thus, we obtain that the exterior derivative
induces a derivation
RJ → ΩJ
E†
∞
from the ring RJ to the module ΩJ
E†
∞
, hence a natural morphism
Ω
RJ /ˆR
→ ΩJ
E†
∞
But one computes easily (using the exact sequence considered above in whichRJ appears
as the term in the middle) that this morphism is an isomorphism (where we use that
p ̸= 2!), i.e., we have proven the following
Lemma 2.3. We have: Ω
RJ /ˆR
∼= ΩJ
E†
∞
.
Thus, the well-known relation between derivations and diﬀerentials implies (by Lem-
mas 2.2, 2.3) that ΞRJ [pn] factors as the composite of the tautological derivation
dRJ : RJ → Ω
RJ /ˆR
∼= ΩJ
E†
∞
and a morphism
ΩJ
E†
∞
→ Func(TE ⊗ Z/pn · Z,J Qp/Zp )
If we then restrict to the invariant diﬀerentials ΩInv,J
E†
∞
⊆ ΩJ
E†
∞
,w eg e tam o r p h i s m
Ψ[pn]:Ω Inv,J
E†
∞
→ Func(TE ⊗ Z/pn · Z,J Qp/Zp )
Lemma 2.4. The image of Ψ[pn] lies in the subset
Hom(TE ⊗ Z/pn · Z,J Qp/Zp ) ⊆ Func(TE ⊗ Z/pn · Z,J Qp/Zp )
of “functions that are compatible with the additive group operations onTE ⊗ Z/pn · Z and
JQp/Zp .”
Proof. Indeed, this follows by observing that since the deﬁnition of Ψ[ pn] is “natural,”
it is functorial with respect to the homomorphism μ : E∞ ×ˆR
E∞ → E∞ (deﬁned by the
351

group law on the group schemeE∞ ). On the other hand, (by the functoriality of invariant
diﬀerentials with respect to homomorphisms) the pull-back toE∞ ×ˆR
E∞ of any section α
of ΩInv,J
E†
∞
is simply (α,α). Put another way, this implies that to evaluate (Ψ[pn])(α)o nt h e
sum of two elements of TE ⊗ Z/pn · Z is the same as the sum of the values of (Ψ[ pn])(α)
at each of these two elements, i.e., the function (Ψ[pn])(α) ∈ Func(TE ⊗ Z/pn · Z,J Qp/Zp )
is additive, as desired. ⃝
Note that the additivity property of Lemma 2.4 implies that: (i) the image of Ψ[pn]i s
annihilated by pn; (ii) for α ∈ ΩInv,J
E†
∞
, the function (Ψ[pn−1])(α) is the function induced by
(p · Ψ[pn])(α) on the quotient TE ⊗ Z/pn · Z → TE ⊗ Z/pn−1 · Z. In particular, by taking
the inverse limit, we obtain a morphism:
Ψ Zp :Ω Inv,J
E†
∞
→ Hom(TE,J )
This morphism is the morphism that deﬁnes the Hodge-Tate decomposition (cf., e.g., the
ﬁnal Theorem – i.e., the “relative version” – in [Hyodo], §0.3). The following result may
be regarded as the main theorem of the Hodge-Tate theory of an elliptic curve:
Theorem 2.5. The morphism
Ψ Zp :Ω Inv,J
E†
∞
→ Hom(TE,J )
is invertible over Qp, and its inverse has poles annihilated by p
1
(p−1) .
Proof. Note that ΨZp is an ˆR-linear morphism between free ˆR-modules of rank 2. More-
over, its determinant may be regarded as a morphism
det(Ψ Zp ): J → det(TE)∨ ⊗Zp J⊗2 = J⊗2(−1)
i.e., this determinant may be thought of as an element
D ∈ HomˆR
(J, J⊗2(−1)) = J(−1) = HomZp (Zp(1),J )
I claim that (up to a sign) this element is the morphism β : Zp(1) → J discussed at the
beginning of this §. (Note that this is suﬃcient to complete the proof of Theorem 2.5.)
In order to prove this claim, let us ﬁrst observe that it suﬃces to prove it when the
present S is replaced by the (formal scheme given by the) completion ofS along D. Indeed,
this is clear when this completion along the divisor at inﬁnity D is “schematically dense”
352

in S (i.e., the map from functions on S to functions on this completion is injective).
But this holds in the “universal case,” i.e., when the original S is ´etale over (the p-
adic completion of) the moduli stack ( M1,0)Zp . Thus, it suﬃces to work in a formal
neighborhood of inﬁnity. In particular, for the rest of the proof, we assume that S is such
a formal neighborhood.
Then, by Chapter III, Theorem 2.1, we have an exact sequence of group objects
0 → (Gm)S → E†
∞ → WE → 0
over S. (Here, WE is the aﬃne group object associated to ωE.) Let us observe that,
relative to the structure of E†
∞ as a crystal over Spf( ˆR), this exact sequence is horizontal.
Indeed, the subobject ( Gm)S ⊆ E†
∞ may be recovered as the (formal) schematic closure
of the prime-to- p torsion points of E†
∞ that lie inside ( Gm)S. But it is clear that the
subschemes deﬁned by these torsion points are horizontal. Thus, we see that this exact
sequence is horizontal, as desired.
Next, observe that, since we are working in a formal neighborhood of inﬁnity, the
Γ
R-module ﬁts into a natural exact sequence of Γ R-modules:
0 → Z/pn · Z(1) → TE ⊗ Z/pn · Z → Z/pn · Z → 0
Moreover, if we consider the aﬃne coordinate “ T”o nWE corresponding to the trivializa-
tion of ωE given by “d log(U)” (notation of Chapter III, §5), then it follows from Chapter
III, Corollary 5.9, that the image under Ξ RJ [pn] of the section of RJ deﬁned by “ T · j”
(where j ∈ J) is the function onTE ⊗Z/pn · Z that arises by pulling back (toTE ⊗Z/pn · Z)
the J-valued function on Z/pn · Z that maps b ∈ Z/pn · Z to b · j. Thus, in particular,
applying Hom(−,J ) to the inverse limit as n →∞ of the above exact sequence — which
yields an exact sequence
0 → J → Hom(TE,J ) → J(−1) → 0
— we see that ΨZp maps T ·J ⊆ ΩInv,J
E†
∞
to J ⊆ Hom(TE,J ) isomorphically via the morphism
given by T ↦→ 1.
Thus, it remains to consider what happens when functions on (Gm)S are restricted to
Z/pn · Z(1) ⊆ TE ⊗ Z/pn · Z. In particular, we would like to investigate the image of the
invariant diﬀerential d log(U) under Ψ[ pn]. But since Ψ[ pn] was deﬁned by factoring the
derivation ΞRJ [pn] (cf. Lemma 2.2) through the tautological derivation, it follows that this
amounts to investigating the behavior of the function “log( U)” on Z/pn · Z(1) ⊆ (Gm)S.
But then it follows from thedeﬁnition of the morphism β : Zp(1) → J (which is essentially
given by taking the logarithm ofp-power roots of unity! — cf. [Falt2], II., (b.)) that (up to
a sign), if we take the inverse limit asn →∞ , the image ofd log(U) ∈ ωE ⊆ Ωinv
E†
∞
/(J ⊗RτE)
353

under the composite of Ψ Zp with the quotient Hom( TE,J ) → J(−1) is precisely β ∈
Hom(Zp(1),J )= J(−1). More explicitly, let ζ ∈ ˆR be a pn-th root of unity. Write
˜ζ ∈ p−n · Zp(1) ⊆ Qp(1) for an element such that z
def
= βQp (˜ζ) ≡ ζ modulo J. Note that
z ∈ B itself is not necessarily apn-th root of unity. Ifδ
def
= −p−n ·ζ·β(pn ·˜ζ) ∈ p−n ·J ⊆ JQp ,
then
(z + δ)pn
= zpn
+ pn · zpn −1 · δ=1+ β(pn · ˜ζ)+ pn · ζ−1 · δ=1
i.e., z + δ∈ μpn (B). Thus, the evaluation map “modulo B” (cf. the deﬁnition of Ξ RJ [pn]
above) maps the function U on (Gm)S to the image of z + δ in BQp/Zp . In fact, this
image is equal to the image δ∈ JQp/Zp of δ. Put another way, we obtain that dU ↦→ δ,s o
d log(U)= U −1 · dU ↦→ ζ−1 · δ= −p−n · β(pn · ˜ζ)( m o dJ) ∈ JQp/Zp . Taking the inverse
limit as n →∞ , we thus obtain that, in this inverse limit, d log(U) ↦→− β, as desired.
Thus, combining this with what was done in the preceding paragraph, we see that the
determinant D in question is equal to ±β,a sc l a i m e d .⃝
Remark. The isomorphism of Theorem 2.5 is the Hodge-Tate Comparison Isomorphismof
an elliptic curve. If one restricts it to a pointα of S valued in some ﬁnite extension L of K,
then it follows from the facts H
1(ΓL, ˆL(1)) = 0, H0(ΓL, ˆL)= L (where ΓL
def
=G a l (L/L))
that Ωinv
E†
∞
|α admits a unique ΓL-invariant splitting
Ωinv
E†
∞
|α = ωE |α ⊕ τE(1)|α
(where we use that JQp = ˆRQp (1)), hence that Theorem 2.5 gives us an isomorphism
ωE |α ⊕ τE(1)|α ∼= TE ⊗Zp
ˆL
This is the usual form in which the Hodge-Tate “comparison isomorphism”/decomposition
is stated.
The important point here is that this well-known isomorphism is essentially deﬁned
by restricting functions on the universal extension of E to p-power torsion points (cf. the
deﬁnition of Ξ Qp [pn]), i.e.,
The Hodge-Tate Comparison Isomorphism is deﬁned in a fashion which
is entirely analogousto the deﬁnition of the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison
Isomorphism (Chapter VIII, Theorem A).
Note, moreover, that after reducing Ξ Qp [pn] “modulo Zp,” and factoring through the
tautological derivation dRJ , we restricted to the invariant diﬀerentials on the universal
354

extension. Thus, put another way, the comparison isomorphism of Theorem 2.5 was deﬁned
essentially byintegrating invariant diﬀerentials, and then restricting the resulting functions
to p-power torsion points. (Thus, these “resulting functions” are essentially “logarithm”
type functions, of the sort reviewed in the Appendix.) Regarded from this point of view,
we thus also see the explicit analogy between this p-adic comparison isomorphism and its
complex counterpart in §1.
Finally, we makethe connection between the above discussion of the Hodge-Tate Com-
parison Isomorphism and the arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism. In keeping with the
analogy to the theory of §1,3, we start oﬀ with the comparison isomorphism (Theorem
2.5):
Ψ Qp : E
def
=( ΩInv,J
E†
∞
)Qp
∼= Hom(TE,J Qp )= V ∨
E (1) ⊗Qp
ˆRQp
∼= VE ⊗Qp
ˆRQp
(where Ψ Qp
def
=Ψ Zp ⊗ Qp, VE
def
= TE ⊗ Qp). Since VE ⊗Qp
ˆRQp has a natural ΓR-action,
we thus obtain a natural Γ R-action on E. This technique of obtaining a Galois action
on the de Rham side of the comparison isomorphism by pulling back (via the comparison
isomorphism) the natural Galois action on the ´etale side is entirely analogous to what is
done in §1,3.
Thus, we have a natural Γ
R-action on E. Note, moreover, that we have an exact
sequence of ˆRQp -modules:
0 → τE(1) ⊗R
ˆRQp →E → ωE ⊗R
ˆRQp → 0
(where we identify JQp with ˆRQp (1) via β). Moreover, it is easy to see from the deﬁnition
of ΞRJ [pn] that the natural Galois action on τE(1) ⊗R
ˆRQp ⊆E is compatible with the
Galois action on VE ⊗Qp
ˆRQp . Thus, this submodule is stabilized by Γ R,a n dt h ea b o v e
exact sequence is an exact sequence of Γ R-modules. (Note that the fact that the Galois
action on ωE ⊗R
ˆR arising from the Galois action on E is the expected action may be
derived using determinants, as in the proof of Theorem 2.5.) We observe that this exact
sequence is essentially the same as that of [Mzk3], Proposition 2.4.
This exact sequence thus deﬁnes a cohomology class
η
KS ∈ H1(ΓR,Ho mˆRQp
(ωE ⊗R
ˆRQp ,τE(1) ⊗R
ˆRQp )) = H1(ΓR,τ⊗2
E (1) ⊗R
ˆRQp )
Such a cohomology class may be thought of as an equivalence class of twisted homomor-
phisms ΓR → τ⊗2
E (1)ˆRQp
def
= τ⊗2
E (1) ⊗R
ˆRQp , where we consider twisted homomorphisms
355

that diﬀer by (the twisted homomorphism deﬁned by) a coboundary to be equivalent. We
would like to regard this equivalence class of twisted homomorphisms which, by abuse of
notation, we write
κ
arith,p
R :Γ R → τ⊗2
E (1)ˆRQp
as a sort of p-adic (Galois) group-theoretic/arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism,a n a l -
ogous to the morphisms “ κfunc
SL2 ”o f §1, and “ κarith
E ”i n §3. Note that the construction of
κarith,p
R starting from the comparison isomorphism is entirely analogous to what is done in
§1,3.
To explain why it is natural to regardκarith,p
R as a sort of Kodaira-Spencer morphism,
we must recall the theory of [Falt1]. In [Falt1], I., §4, (b), (f), a certain natural extension
of ΓR-modules
0 → p− 1
(p−1) · ˆR → Eρ → Ωlog
S (−1) ⊗R
ˆR → 0
(where Ωlog
S
def
=Ω Slog/A) is constructed. If we write Θ log
S
def
=( Ω log
S )∨ for the logarithmic
tangent bundle of Slog over A, then we get an element
ηFalt ∈ H1(ΓR,Θlog
S (1) ⊗R
ˆRQp )
This element may be thought of as a twisted homomorphism
ξFalt
R :Γ R → Θlog
S (1)ˆRQp
On the other hand, we have the classical Kodaira-Spencer morphism
κclass
R :Θ log
S → τ⊗2
E
given by observing the extent to which the Hodge ﬁltration of the crystal Ω
E†
∞
varies as
one moves in various tangent directions ∈ Θlog
S . Then the relationship between the p-adic
arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphismκarith,p
R and the classical Kodaira-Spencer morphism
κclass
R is given by Faltings’ morphismξFalt
R , as described in Theorem 2.6 below.
Remark. If we write
Δ R
def
=K e r ( ΓR → ΓK
def
=G a l (K/K))
356

for the geometric portion of the Galois groupΓR, then according to the theory of “almost
´etale extensions” discussed in [Falt1], “Δ R ⊗Zp
ˆRQp ” (notation, which, of course, is not
deﬁned rigorously, but is meant to be suggestive of what is going on) may roughly be
identiﬁed with Θ log
S (1) ⊗R
ˆRQp ,t h a ti st os a y ,o v e rˆRQp ,t h egeometric Galois group Δ R
of Slog is “almost equivalent” to the tangent bundle of Slog, hence may be thought of as
a group of “ motions in Slog.” From this “almost” point of view, it is thus natural that
the domain of ourp-adic arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphismκarith,p
R is the Galois group
ΓR.
Theorem 2.6. We have a commutative diagram:
ΓR
−ξFalt
R
−→ Θlog
S (1)ˆRQp⏐⏐↓id
⏐⏐↓κclass
R (1)ˆRQp
ΓR
κarith,p
R
−→ τ⊗2
E (1)ˆRQp
i.e., in terms of cohomology classes, the change of coeﬃcients morphism
H1(ΓR,Θlog
S (1) ⊗R
ˆRQp ) → H1(ΓR,τ⊗2
E (1) ⊗R
ˆRQp )
deﬁned by κclass
R maps −ηFalt ↦→ ηKS.
Proof. First of all, since both ηFalt and ηKS are clearly functorial in R, it suﬃces to prove
the result in the universal case, i.e., the case where S is (formally) ´etale over the p-adic
completion of the moduli stack (M1,0)Zp . Thus, for the rest of the proof, we assume that
we are dealing with such an S.
Let us write
Δ R
def
=K e r ( ΓR → ΓK
def
=G a l (K/K))
Then observe that by the theory of [Falt1] (cf. especially [Falt1], p. 270, Theorem 4.4,
(i)), it follows thatH0(ΓK,H 1(ΔR,τ⊗2
E (1) ⊗R
ˆRQp )) is a free RQp -module of rank1, while
H1(ΓK,H 0(ΔR,τ⊗2
E (1) ⊗R
ˆRQp )) = 0 (cf. the well-known fact that H1(ΓK,K(1)) = 0;
[Mzk3], Lemma 2.2). Thus, by the Leray-Serre spectral sequence, we obtain that
H1(ΓR,τ⊗2
E (1) ⊗R
ˆRQp ) ↪→ H0(ΓK,H 1(ΔR,τ⊗2
E (1) ⊗R
ˆRQp )) ( ∼= RQp )
i.e., that two classes in H1(ΓR,τ⊗2
E (1) ⊗R
ˆRQp ) coincide if and only if they coincide after
restriction to a formal neighborhood of the divisor at inﬁnity D (cf. the proof of The-
orem 2.5). Thus, it suﬃces to prove the result in the case where S i sas u c haf o r m a l
neighborhood.
357

In this case, however, it follows from the construction of the extension “Eρ” in [Falt1],
I., §4, that ηFalt is essentially given by the image of the class∈ H1(ΓR,Zp(1)) obtained by
extracting p-power roots of the q-parameter under the change of coeﬃcients morphism
H1(ΓR,Zp(1)) → H1(ΓR,Θlog
S (1) ⊗R
ˆRQp )
deﬁned by the “tangent vector” ∂/∂log(q). On the other hand, it follows from the discus-
sion in the proof of Theorem 2.5 that the extension ηKS is simply the extension class of
the exact sequence
0 → Zp(1) → TE → Zp → 0
pushed forward by the change of coeﬃcients morphism
H1(ΓR,Zp(1)) → H1(ΓR,τ⊗2
E (1) ⊗R
ˆRQp )
deﬁned by ( ∂/∂U)⊗2 (notation of the proof of Theorem 2.5). On the other hand, since it
is well-known thatthe classical Kodaira-Spencer morphism maps∂/∂log(q) ↦→− (∂/∂U)⊗2
(cf., e.g., [FC], p. 84, the second paragraph preceding Lemma 9.3, beginning “As an
example...”), it thus follows that −ηFalt ↦→ ηKS, as desired. ⃝
Remark. Put another way, the message of the proof of Theorem 2.6, and indeed of this
entire §,i st h a t :
The relationship between thep-adic Galois-theoretic/arithmetic Kodaira-
Spencer morphism and the classical Kodaira-Spencer morphism is the
essential content of Serre-Tate theory.
For more on this point of view in the case of abelian varieties, we refer to [Katz]. For
more on this point of view in a more general context (in particular, the case of hyperbolic
curves), we refer to [Mzk1], Introduction; Chapter V,§1; as well as to [Mzk2], Introduction,
especially §2.3.
358

§3. The Global Arithmetic Case:
Application of the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism
In this §, we apply the Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism (cf. Chapter VIII,
Theorem A) to construct a global arithmetic analogue of the Kodaira-Spencer morphism
of a family of elliptic curves. The technique of construction is motivated by the point of
view discussed in §1,2, in the complex and p-adic cases.
We begin by discussingthe behavior of the trivializations arising from theta groups at
archimedean primes.T h u s ,l e tE be an elliptic curve over C. Fix a positive integer d,a n d
write
L
def
= OE(d · [e])
Let |∼| L be a metric on L whose curvature is translation-invariant. Recall from Chapter
IV, §1, the subscheme of symmetric elements
SL ⊆G L
of the theta group GL of L.
Lemma 3.1. The automorphisms of (E, L) deﬁned by points of SL preserve |∼| L.
Proof. Indeed, clearly any translation of a translation-invariant (1 ,1)-form is again
translation-invariant. Thus, it follows that for γ =( α,ι) ∈S L,t h em e t r i cγ(|∼| L)
that one obtains on L by ﬁrst pulling back |∼| L via ι: T ∗
α L ∼= L, and then applying
(T −1
α )∗ to produce (by transport of structure) a metric onL has translation-invariant cur-
vature. Thus, the metrics γ(|∼| L)a n d|∼| L both have translation-invariant curvature,
hence diﬀer by a positive constantλγ. Moreover, since γ ∈S L implies γN ∈S L (∀N ∈ Z),
it follows that the correspondence γ ↦→ λγ deﬁnes a homomorphism from <γ> (the sub-
group of GL generated by γ, which lies inside SL)t o R>0 (equipped with its multiplicative
group structure). Since <γ> is a ﬁnite group, it thus follows that this homomorphism is
trivial,s o λγ = 1, as desired. ⃝
Now recall the “theta trivialization”
Θα : L|T ∗
α KL
∼= (L|α0 ) ⊗OKL0 OKL
(where α ∈ KL) of the discussion following Chapter IV, Theorem 1.6. Note that both
sides of this isomorphism may be regarded as ﬁnite-dimensional complex vector spaces.
Moreover, both of these vector spaces have natural metrics, arising from |∼|
L,a n dt h e
359

fact that since we are working over C, the ring OKL may be regarded as the ring of
C-valued functions on the d-torsion points dE of E, hence admits a natural L2-metric
||f ||2 def
= 1
d2 ·
∑
τ∈dE
|f(τ)|2
(for f ∈O KL ). Since this trivialization is deﬁned by the splitting σ :2 · KL →G L of
GL → KL discussed in Chapter IV, Theorem 1.6, which factors throughSL, it follows from
Lemma 3.1 that:
Lemma 3.2. If one equips both sides of the theta trivialization
Θα : L|T ∗
α KL
∼= (L|α0 ) ⊗OKL0 OKL
determined by the splittingσ of Chapter IV, Theorem 1.6, with their natural metrics (aris-
ing from |∼| L, and the L2-metric on OKL ), then this trivialization Θ is an isometry.
Remark. In particular, we may conclude the following: Recall the Comparison Isomor-
phism (cf. Chapter V, Theorem 3.1, (2); or, alternatively, Chapter VIII, Theorem A,
(2))
Ξ:Γ ( E†
[d], Lη)<d ∼= Lη|dE
where Lη
def
= T ∗
η L,a n dη ∈ E is a torsion point of order m not dividing d.T h u s , i f w e
compose this isomorphism with the trivialization
Θη : L|T ∗
η KL = Lη|dE ∼= (L|η0 ) ⊗OKL0 OKL
we get an isomorphism
Ψ:Γ ( E†
[d], T ∗
η L)<d ∼= (L|η0 ) ⊗OKL0 OKL
of d-dimensional vector spaces over C. Next, suppose that we are given an automorphism
Φo ft h e C-algebra OKL which preserves and induces the identity on the C-subalgebra
OKL0 ⊆O KL arising from the quotient KL → KL
0. Observe (by thinking about the fact
that Φ necessarily arises as the morphism induced on functions by some automorphism of
the set of d-torsion points of E) that such an automorphism Φ is anisometry of O
KL onto
itself (where we equip OKL with the natural L2-metric of the discussion above). Note,
moreover, that Φ induces an (isometric) automorphism of ( L|η0 ) ⊗OKL0 OKL , hence (by
360

conjugating by Ψ) an automorphism of Γ(E†
[d], T ∗
η L)<d. By Lemma 3.2 (and the deﬁnition
of the “´etale metric” || ∼ || et on Γ(E†
[d], T ∗
η L)<d), we thus obtain that:
Φ induces an automorphism ofΓ(E†
[d], T ∗
η L)<d which is an isometry with
respect to the || ∼ || et-metric (cf. Chapter VIII, Theorem A, (4)).
This observation will be of central importance in the following discussion.
Now letSlog be anylog schemewhose underlying scheme isconnected, ﬂat and of ﬁnite
type over Z, and whose log structure is deﬁned by a divisor with normal crossings. Write
Int(Slog) ⊆ S for the interior of Slog, i.e., the open subscheme where the log structure is
trivial. Let
Clog → Slog
be a log elliptic curve over Slog as in Chapter VIII, Theorem A, i.e.:
(1) the divisor at inﬁnity D ⊆ S (i.e., the pull-back of the divisor at inﬁnity
of ( M1,0)Z via the classifying morphism S → (M1,0)Z)i saC a r t i e r
divisor on S;
(2) ´etale locally on the completion of S along D, the pull-back of the Tate
parameter q to this completion admits a d-th root.
Here, we also make the technical assumption that ifd is even,t h e nthe 2-torsion points of
E → S over the interior of SQ are all rational (i.e., deﬁned over the interior of SQ). Let
us write (as usual)
dE → S
for the ﬁnite, ﬂat group scheme of d-torsion points of E∞ ,S. Note that if we tensor with
Q, the resulting morphism ( dE)Q → SQ is ﬁnite ´etale. Let us ﬁx a geometric point s of
Int(Slog
Q ) valued in an algebraically closed ﬁeld of characteristic 0, and write
ΠS
def
= π1((Slog)Q,s)
for the algebraic fundamental group of Int(Slog
Q ). Also, let us ﬁx a geometric point sd of
dE lying over s. Thus, it is clear that Π S acts naturally on (dE)Q → SQ.
Now I claim that:
361

The natural action of Π S on (dE)Q → SQ extends (uniquely) to an
action on dE → S, except for possible poles annihilated by 4.
The uniqueness of the action follows immediately from the ﬂatness of the morphisms
dE → S and S → Spec(Z). To prove existence, let us ﬁrst observe that it suﬃces to
verify this claim for the“universal cases”S =( M1,0)Z (with the trivial log structure) and
S
def
=S p e c (Z[[q
1
d ]]), endowed with the log structure deﬁned by the divisor V (q
1
d ). In these
cases, it follows from the theory of [KM] (cf., [KM], Chapter 5, especially Theorem 5.1.1)
that the closed subscheme Fd′ of dE corresponding to points of a given order d′ is regular,
hence normal. Thus, it follows immediately that the action of Π S extends to the Fd′ .
Next, one checks that, for instance, at the prime 2, regular functions on the disjoint union
of the F
d′ regarded as rational functions on the original dE have poles annihilated by 4.
Indeed, in our situation, since the baseS is regular of dimension 2, it suﬃces to verify this
assertion on theordinary locus, where it essentially amounts to the corresponding assertion
for μ2N (as opposed to dE), where we write 2 N for the maximal power of 2 dividing d.
But then OF2i
⋂
F2j
(where i<j ≤ N) is annihilated by ζ2i − ζ2j (where ζ?? is a primitive
??-th root of unity), which has the same 2-adic valuation as 22−j+1
. Thus, we see that the
structure sheaf of the intersection of F2i with the union of the other Fd′ ’s is annihilated
by 2 to the power
i · 2−i+1 +2 −(i+1)+1 +2 −(i+2)+1 +...+2 −N+1 ≤ i · 2−i+1 +2 −i+1 =( i +1 ) · 2−i+1 ≤ 2
i.e., annihilated by 4 (which implies that the “rational function on μ2N ”w h i c hi s1o n
F2i and 0 on the other Fd′ ’s has poles annihilated by 4, as desired). This completes the
proof of the claim at the prime 2. At odd primes, the extendability of the action of Π S
follows from the fact that since the universal bases in question (i.e., S =( M1,0)Z and
S
def
=S p e c (Z[[q
1
d ]])) are “absolutely unramiﬁed,” the fact that dEσ (where σ ∈ ΠS)a n d
dE are “equal” over Q implies that their integral structures at the prime p are equal, as
well (cf. [Falt2], Theorems 2.6, 7.1).
Now let us assume that we are also given a torsion point
η ∈ E∞ ,S(S∞ )
of order preciselym ∈ Z≥1 (where m does not divided) which allows us to deﬁne a (Zhang-
theoretically metrized) line bundle L as in Chapter VIII, Theorem A. Note that KL → S
may be identiﬁed with dE → S. On the other hand, by the isomorphism in the discussion
at the end of Chapter V, §1( w h e r ew et a k e“α”t ob ee), we have a natural isomorphism:
L|dE = L|KL
∼= (L|e0 ) ⊗OK0
L
OKL
362

Indeed, this follows immediately from the discussion at the end of Chapter V,§1, in the case
when m =2 d (which ensures that L is symmetric). But this case diﬀers (cf. the deﬁniton
of L in Chapter V, §1) from the case of an arbitrarym by a translation, plus a modiﬁcation
of the integral structure at inﬁnity by a d-invariant distribution. Translations are not a
problem (by “transport of structure”), while modiﬁcations of the integral structure at
inﬁnity by a d-invariant distribution are not a problem since they are preserved by the
action of theta groups (cf. Chapter IV, Proposition 5.1). Thus, in particular, we see (by
the assumption concerning the rationality of the 2-torsion points!) that we get a natural
action (up to poles annihilated by 4)o f Π
S on
(L|e0 ) ⊗OK0
L
OKL
(where e is the identity section of C → S).
Thus, we obtain a natural action (up to poles annihilated by 4)o f ΠS on
L|dE = L|
dE†
∞
i.e., on the range of the evaluation map of Chapter VIII, Theorem A:
Ξ{∞ ,et} :( fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{∞ ,et}→ (fS)∗(L|
(dE†
∞ )
)
By Chapter VIII, Theorem A, (2), it follows that the poles of the inverse morphism to
this evaluation map are contained in the divisor [η ⋂ (dE)]. Thus, we see that we get a
natural action of ΠS up to poles in the divisor [η ⋂ (dE)] +V (4) on
HDR
def
=( fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{∞ ,et}
(where V (4) is the zero locus of 4). Here by the expression “with poles in (a divisor),”
we mean that the action of any element of Π S induces an endomorphism of HDR ⊗ Q,
which takes HDR into the subsheaf of HDR ⊗ Q given by meromorphic sections of HDR
which are integral everywhere, except for possible poles contained in the divisor stated.
Moreover, the Remark following Lemma 3.2 implies that if we put a metric onLC (where
LC
def
= L⊗ Z C) whose curvature on the ﬁbers of EC → SC is translation-invariant,t h e n
the resulting “´etale metric” || ∼ || et (cf. Chapter VIII, Theorem A, (4)) is preserved by
t h ea c t i o no fΠS on HDR. We summarize this discussion as follows:
363

Theorem 3.3. Let Slog be any connected log scheme, whose underlying scheme is ﬂat
and of ﬁnite type over Z, and such that the log structure is deﬁned by a divisor with normal
crossings. Fix positive integers m, d,w h e r em does not divide d.L e t
Clog → Slog
be a log elliptic curve over Slog,a n dη ∈ E∞ ,S(S∞ ) be a torsion point of order precisely
m satisfying the hypotheses of Chapter VIII, Theorem A. Fix geometric pointssd, s of dE
(the scheme of d-torsion points of E∞ ,S), Int(Slog)Q such that sd maps to s. Write
ΠS
def
= π1((Slog)Q,s)
for the algebraic fundamental group of Int(Slog
Q ). Let us assume that if d is even,t h e n
ΠS acts trivially on the 2-torsion points of the given log elliptic curve. Fix a metric on
LC
def
= L⊗ Z C whose curvature on the ﬁbers of EC → SC is translation-invariant.T h e n
there is a natural action of ΠS on the metrized vector bundle
HDR
def
=( fS)∗(L|
E†
∞ ,[d]
)<d{∞ ,et}
on S which is integral (over S) except for possible poles contained in the divisor
[η
⋂
(dE)] +V (4)
and preserves the “´etale metric” || ∼ || et (cf. Chapter VIII, Theorem A) determined by
the chosen metric on L.
Next, recall that the metrized vector bundleHDR is equipped with a natural ﬁltration,
which we refer to as theHodge ﬁltration. The subquotients of this ﬁltration admit natural
isomorphisms (cf. Chapter VIII, Theorem A, (3)):
(Fj+1/Fj)(HDR) ∼= 1
j! · exp(−(aι)j) · (fS)∗(L|E∞ ,S ) ⊗OS τ⊗j
E
for j =0 ,... ,d − 1. Here, the “exp( −(aι)j)” are powers of theq-parameter, as in Chapter
VIII, Theorem A, (3), i.e.,
exp((aι)j)= q≈ j2
8d
Let us write
364

Filt(HDR)
for theﬂag variety over S of ﬁltrations of HDR which are of the same “type” (i.e., each “Fj”
has the same rank asFj(HDR)) as the Hodge ﬁltration. (Thus, each ﬁber ofFilt(HDR) → S
is noncanonically isomorphic to the ﬂag variety of ﬂags F1(V ) ⊆ F2(V ) ⊆ ... Fd−1(V ) ⊆
Fd(V )= V in a d2-dimensional vector space V for which dim(Fj(V )) = j · d.) Note that
if we apply the action of ΠS on HDR to the Hodge ﬁltration, we thus obtain a morphism
κarith
E :Π S → Filt(HDR)(S)
(where the “( S)” denotes the “S-valued points”). Note that
The integrality statements of Theorem 3.3 (at both the ﬁnite and inﬁnite
primes) imply that the image of each element γ ∈ ΠS under κarith
E is a
ﬁltration {γ(Fj(HDR)} such that (up to denominators contained in the
divisor [η ⋂ (dE)]+V (4))e a c hγ(Fj(HDR)} is globally isomorphic (i.e.,
isomorphic as a vector bundle on S, equipped with a metric overSC)t o
Fj(HDR).
Note, further that the construction ofκarith
E is entirely analogousto the construction of the
“group-theoretic Kodaira-Spencer morphism”
κfunc
SL2 : SL2(R) → Filt(HolomPoly( ˜E† ))
of §1, as well as to the morphism
κarith,p
R :Γ R → τ⊗2
E (1)ˆRQp
of §2.
Deﬁnition 3.4. We shall refer to
κarith
E :Π S → Filt(HDR)(S)
as the arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism associated toE → S.
Example 3.5. Suppose, for instance, that
S =S p e c (OK)
365

where OK is the ring of integers of a number ﬁeld K (i.e., [ K : Q] < ∞ ). Suppose,
moreover, that the log structure ofSlog is deﬁned by the divisor Dred ⊆ S (where D is the
“divisor at inﬁnity” associated to Clog → Slog). In this example, let us assume that
d ≥ 12
and write d2
def
=2 ord2(d) (i.e., d2 divides d and d/d2 is odd). Here, let us take m
def
=2 d2,
n =4 d2. Suppose that the elliptic curve EK over K is suﬃciently close to inﬁnity at all
the archimedean primes, in the following sense:
For each embeddingσ of K into C, the resulting elliptic curve Eσ (over
C) can be written as Gm/qZ,w h e r eq =e x p ( 2πiτ) satisﬁes:
Im(τ) ≥ 200{log2(d)+4 d2 · log(d)+4 d2 · log(4d2)}
(Thus, if d> >d 2 (for instance, if d is odd, in which case d2 = 1), then the lower bound
on Im(τ) goes roughly as log2(d).) Note that it is not diﬃcult, for a ﬁxed d, to construct
lots of examples of EK satisfying this condition at the archimedean primes.
Now it follows from Chapter VIII, Theorem A, (4), (C), that:
e−33d ·| |∼| | qCG ≤ 1
4d2
· e−32d ·| |∼| | qCG ≤| |∼| | et ≤ e4d ·| |∼| | qCG
Thus, in particular, it follows that if we include both the poles at the ﬁnite primes (cf.
Theorem 3.3; the ﬁrst Remark following Chapter VI, Theorem 4.1) as well as the poles at
the archimedean primes, then:
The global divisor of poles of the action on H
DR of an element of ΠS
has Arakelov-theoretic degree (cf. Chapter I, §1) ≤ 38d · [K : Q],a n d
is concentrated at the archimedean primes, and the primes that divide
m =2 d
2.
(where the “38” is the sum of the “4” and the “33” appearing in the inequalities above,
plus “1” more, to take care of the contribution from the ﬁnite primes). Put another way,
the action of each element of Π
S maps HDR, whose subquotients are given by
1
j! · exp(−(aι)j) · τ⊗j
E
(tensored with a “common factor” of (fS)∗(L|E∞ ,S )) to a module whose subquotients are
given by
366

1
j! · exp(−(aι)j) · τ⊗j
E · (poles)
(tensored with a “common factor” of (fS)∗(L|E∞ ,S )) — where the “(poles)” admit bounds
as described in the italicized caption above — in a fashion which is integral at all the
primes (both archimedean and non-archimedean) of the number ﬁeldK.
Remark. It is thus tempting, relative to the analogue with the Kodaira-Spencer morphism
in the geometric case, to try to apply this theory to obtain bounds on the height of an
elliptic curve over a number ﬁeld, as conjectured by Szpiro and Vojta (cf., e.g., [Lang],
[Vojta]). There are, unfortunately, a number of technical diﬃculties here. Perhaps the
most obvious is the factors of “exp(−(a
ι)j)” that appear in the subquotients – we refer to
these factors as Gaussian poles (since they grow like a Gaussian distribution) – sincethese
factors distort one’s ability to compute degrees as one would like. That is to say, by analogy
to the geometric case, ideally one wishes for only the factor “ τ⊗j
E · (poles)” to appear in
these subquotients. Relative to this point of view,poles of the order“ Cj ≈ Cd”( a sj → d)
are not a substantial problem (at least if one concentrates on the subquotients where j is
close to d), since this just adds an extra constant term to the Arakelov-theoretic degree of
τE. From this point of view, one might a priori think that the factors of1
j! are also a cause
for concern (since they are not of the order Cd). Note that this is why, in the theory of
Chapter VIII – cf. especially the statement concerning analytic torsion and the product
formula at the end of Chapter VIII, Theorem A – we were so concerned with making sure
that the “denominators” that occurred in the theory at the archimedean primes were of
the order “C
d” (i.e.,even when one takes the factors of 1
j! mentioned above into account).
Another technical diﬃculty (by comparison to the geometric case) is thegeneral non-
linearity that appears – e.g., of Π S, by comparison to the tangent bundle in the geometric
case; of the action of Π S on HDR, which does not appear to arise from, say, taking sym-
metric powers of the some action on F2(HDR), as in the geometric case. Perhaps this
nonlinearity is not surprising in view of the general phenomenon that Arakelov theory
tends to give rise to nonlinear objects which are analogous to linear objects in the classical
geometric theory (for instance, the global integral sections of a line bundle in Arakelov
theory are not, in general, closed under addition).
Yet another technical diﬃculty is the fact that in Example 3.5 above, we needed to
assume that E
K is rather close to inﬁnity at the archimedean primes.
It is the hope of the author that these technical diﬃculties can be overcome in a future
paper.
367

Appendix:
Formal Uniformization of Smooth Abelian Group Schemes
In this Appendix, we review various well-known facts concerning the “exponential
map” of an abelian group scheme.
Let S be a noetherian scheme. Let
f : G → S
be a smooth, abelian group scheme with identity section e : S↪ → G. Observe that the
morphism
G ×S G → G ×S G
deﬁned on T-valued points (where T is an S-scheme) g,h ∈ G(T)b y( g,h ) ↦→ (gh,g )
induces an isomorphism of the diagonal embedding G↪ → G ×S G with the embedding
G↪ → G ×S G given by g ↦→ (g,e )( w h e r ee is the identity element). Since the sheaf of
diﬀerentials ΩG/S on G is the conormal bundle of the former embedding, we thus obtain
a natural isomorphism
f ∗e∗ΩG/S ∼= ΩG/S
Write
Ω
def
= e∗ΩG/S
Thus, Ω is a locally free sheaf on S, and the above isomorphism induces a natural mor-
phism Ω → f∗ΩG/S. The diﬀerentials in the image of this morphism are called invariant
diﬀerentials on G.
Now let
A
be the “pro-algebra” (i.e., inverse limit of ﬁnite locally free OS-algebras) on S given by
taking the completed PD-envelope in G of e (cf., e.g., [BO] for more details). Thus, A is
equipped with a natural augmentation A→O S (“evaluation at e”) whose kernel I is a
PD-ideal of A.I f n is a positive integer, let us write I[n] for the nth divided power of I.
Thus,
An
def
= A/I[n]
368

is a ﬁnite locally free OS-algebra, and I[n]/I[n+1] is a ﬁnite locally free OS-module. More-
over, A is complete with respect to the ﬁltration
... ⊆I [n] ⊆ ... ⊆I [2] ⊆I
Intuitively speaking, if x1,... ,xr are a complete set of local parameters on G (over S)a t
e,t h e nA may be described as the ring of formal power series in divided powers of the xi
with coeﬃcients in OS. Moreover, note that A may be regarded as also being equipped
with an OG-algebra structure in the sense that one has a coherent system of natural
morphisms Spec(An) → G (“Taylor expansion at e to order n of functions on G”). Thus,
if, for instance, F is a locally free coherent sheaf on G, it makes sense to write A⊗ OG F.
Moreover, A⊗ OG F will be a locally free A-module of ﬁnite rank. In the following, we
shall denote A⊗ OG ∧i ΩG/S by Ωi
A.
Sometimes, we shall want to consider the completed PD-envelope ofG at an S-valued
point x ∈ G(S)o f G which is not equal to e. Note, however, that translation by x induces
an automorphism
Tx : G → G
which maps the completed PD-envelope of G at e (i.e., A) isomorphically onto the com-
pleted PD-envelope of G at x. Thus, in the following, we shall identify these two PD-
envelopes by means of this isomorphism.
Now observe that by formally diﬀerentiating power series, we obtain a de Rham com-
plex of “PD-functions”
A
d
−→ Ω1
A
d
−→ Ω2
A
d
−→ ...
Composing the morphism Ω → f∗ΩG/S constructed above with restriction to Ω 1
A then
gives us a morphism
ι:Ω → Ω1
A
Now we have the following well-known result:
Lemma A.1. Suppose that the map OS →O S given by multplication by 2 is injective.
Then the composite of ιwith the exterior derivative d is zero.
Proof. Since G is abelian, it follows that the automorphismν : G → G given by inversion
is a group homomorphism. Note that ν induces natural actions ν∗ on Ω and on the Ω i
A.
Indeed, ν∗ acts as −1o nΩa n da s( −1)i on Ωi
A.S i n c ed and ιare natural, ν∗ acts on
elements in the image of d ◦ιby multiplication by −1. On the other hand, since these
369

elements are sections of Ω2
A, ν∗ must act on these elements as the identity. Thus, it follows
that Im(d ◦ι) is annihilated by multiplication by 2. On the other hand, since Ω 2
A is an
inverse limit of locally free coherent OS-modules, it follows from the assumption of the
Lemma that Im(d ◦ι) = 0, as desired. ⃝
Let us assume for the rest of this Appendix that the assumption of Lemma A.1 is
in force. Thus, the diﬀerentials in the image of ιare closed, and hence, by formal in-
tegration, exact (see, e.g., [BO] for a discussion of the Poincar´e Lemma in the context
of PD-functions). Moreover, it is clear (from the Poincar´ e Lemma) that d induces an
isomorphism:
d : I (⊆A ) ∼= {exact diﬀerentials of Ω1
A}
Thus, we see that ιlifts to a natural morphism
λ :Ω ↪→I
whose composite with the projection to I/I[2] = Ω is the identity.
Deﬁnition A.2. Suppose that S is a noetherian scheme such that multiplication by 2
on OS is injective. Let G → S be a smooth, abelian group scheme over S. Then we shall
refer to the natural morphism
λ :Ω ↪→I
just constructed as the logarithmic uniformization (morphism) of G.
Proposition A.3. The morphism λ :Ω ↪→I is functorial (in the obvious sense) with
respect to homomorphisms G → H of smooth, abelian group schemes over S.
Proof. Indeed, λ is determined by its composite with the exterior diﬀerential operatord.
Thus, it suﬃces to observe that the morphism Ω→ f∗ΩG/S constructed above is functorial
in G, but this is clear from its construction. ⃝
Example A.4. Suppose that
G =( Gm)S
i.e., the multiplicative group scheme over S. One may think of G as the spectrum of
OS[U, U−1], where U is an indeterminate. Then the image of the natural morphism
370

Ω → f∗ΩG/S constructed above is generated by dU/U .M o r e o v e r ,λ(dU/U)i st h e nat-
ural logarithm
log(U)
def
= −
∞∑
i=1
(1 − U)i
i
Example A.5. Suppose that
G =( Ga)S
i.e., the additive group scheme over S. One may think of G as the spectrum of OS[T],
where T is an indeterminate, and T = 0 is the section “e.” Then the image of the natural
morphism Ω → f∗ΩG/S constructed above is generated by dT.M o r e o v e r ,λ(dT) is just
the function T.
Finally, before proceeding, we recall the analogue of the construction above at the
inﬁnite prime .T h u s , l e tC denote the ﬁeld of complex numbers. Let G be an abelian
complex Lie group.T h u s ,G is “an abelian group object” in the category of complex
(i.e., holomorphic) manifolds. Let Θ (respectively, Ω) denote the tangent (respectively,
cotangent) space to G at the origin. Thus, Θ and Ω are ﬁnite-dimensional complex vector
spaces which are dual to one another.
Now one knows from the elementary theory of complex Lie groups (see, e.g., [Vara])
that there exists a unique holomorphic morphism, called the exponential map
exp
G :Θ →G
compatible with the additive structures of Θ and G and whose derivative at the origin is
the identity map Θ → Θ. Let us denote by Ahol the local ring of holomorphic functions
in a neighborhood of the origin of G.T h u s ,Ahol is equipped with an ideal
Ihol ⊆A hol
of functions vanishing at the origin of G. Since expG induces an isomorphism between the
local rings of holomorphic functions in a neighbhorhood of the origin of Θ and G,w et h u s
see that the local coordinate functions (i.e., elements of Ω) on Θ deﬁne elements of Ihol,
i.e., we have a natural morphism
λhol :Ω ↪→I hol
which is the holomorphic analogue of the algebraic λ constructed above in the following
sense: Suppose G is the complex Lie group deﬁned by some abelian group scheme G over
371

C. Then both Ahol and A embed naturally in the ring Afor of formal functions at the
origin of G (i.e., the ring obtained by completingG at e). Write Ifor ⊆A for for the ideal of
functions vanishing at the origin. Thus, since both Ihol and I may be regarded as subsets
of Ifor, it follows that both λhol and λ deﬁne natural morphisms Ω ↪→I for.
Proposition A.6. These two morphisms Ω ↪→I for coincide.
Proof. Indeed, it is clear (from the theory of the exponential map) that the exterior
derivative d of the image of λhol gives rise to (the power series expansions at the origin of)
invariant diﬀerentials on G.S i n c ed is injective on Ifor, this completes the proof. ⃝
Bibliography
[BO] P. Berthelot and A. Ogus, Notes on Crystalline Cohomology, Princeton Univ. Press
(1978).
[Coln] R. Coleman, Hodge-Tate periods and p-adic Abelian integrals, Inv. Math. 78 (1984),
pp. 351-379.
[Colz] P. Colmez, P´eriodes p-adiques des vari´et´es ab´eliennes, Math. Ann. 292 (1992), pp.
629-644.
[Falt1] G. Faltings, p-adic Hodge Theory, Journal of the Amer. Math. Soc. 1, No. 1 (1988),
pp. 255-299.
[Falt2] G. Faltings, Crystalline Cohomology and p-adic Galois Representations, Proceedings
of the First JAMI Conference, Johns-Hopkins University Press (1990), pp. 25-79.
[FC] G. Faltings and C.-L. Chai,Degenerations of Abelian Varieties, Springer-Verlag (1990).
[Font] J. M. Fontaine, Formes diﬀerentielles et modules de Tate des vari´et´es ab´eliennes sur
les corps locaux, Inv. Math. 65 (1982), pp. 379-409.
[Hyodo] O. Hyodo, On variation of Hodge-Tate structures, Math. Ann. 284 (1989), pp. 7-22.
[Katz] N. Katz, Serre-Tate Local Moduli,Algebraic Surfaces (Orsay, 1976-78), Lecture Notes
in Mathematics 868, Springer-Verlag (1981), pp. 138-202.
[KM] N. Katz and B. Mazur, Arithmetic Moduli of Elliptic Curves, Annals of Mathematics
Studies 108, Princeton University Press (1985).
[Lang] S. Lang, Introduction to Arakelov Theory, Springer-Verlag (1988), Appendix by Vojta.
[Mess] W. Messing, The Crystals Associated to Barsotti-Tate Groups; with Applications to
Abelian Schemes, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 264, Springer-Verlag (1972).
[Mumf] D. Mumford, Abelian Varieties, Oxford University Press (1974).
372

[Mzk1] S. Mochizuki, A Theory of Ordinary p-adic Curves, Publ. of RIMS 32 (1996), pp.
957-1151.
[Mzk2] S. Mochizuki, Foundations of p-adic Teichm¨uller Theory, AMS/IP Studies in Ad-
vanced Mathematics 11, American Mathematical Society/International Press (1999).
[Mzk3] S. Mochizuki, The Local Pro- p Anabelian Geometry of Curves,Inv. Math.,t oa p p e a r .
[Vara] V. S. Varadarajan, Lie Groups, Lie Algebras, and their Representations, Prentice Hall
(1974).
[Vojta] P. Vojta, Diophantine Approximations and Value Distribution Theory, Lecture Notes
in Mathematics 1239, Springer-Verlag (1987).
[Wint] J.-P. Wintenberger, Th´eor`eme de comparaison p-adique pour les sch´emas ab´eliens. I:
Construction de l’accouplement de p´eriodes, P´eriodes p-Adiques, Ast´erisque 223,S o c .
Math. de France (1994).
373