GEOMETRY OF THE HURWITZ SCHEME
The Geometry of the Compactiﬁcation
of the Hurwitz Scheme
by Shinichi MOCHIZUKI*
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Introduction
§1. Diﬀerent Types of Hurwitz Schemes
§2. Irreducibility
§3. Log Admissible Coverings
§3A. Basic Deﬁnitions
§3B. First Properties
§3C. Global Moduli
§3D. Admissible Hurwitz Coverings
§4. Construction of the Boundary Components
Appendix to §4
Pictorial Appendix
§5. Cohomology Calculations
§6. The Main Fibration
§6A. The Excess Divisors in the Main Fibration
§6B. Intersection Theory Calculations
§6C. Ramiﬁcation Indices
§7. The Coeﬃcient Matrix
§8. Arithmetic Applications
Bibliography
Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to study the geometry of the Harris-Mumford compactiﬁ-
cation of the Hurwitz scheme. The Hurwitz scheme parametrizes certain ramiﬁed coverings
Received June 11, 1993.
1991 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation: 14H10
* Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606, Japan
1

f : C → P1 of the projective line by smooth curves. Thus, from the very outset, one sees
that there are essentially two ways to approach the Hurwitz scheme:
(1) We start with P1 and regard the objects of interest as coverings of P1 ;
(2) We start with C and regard the objects of interest as morphisms from C to P1.
One ﬁnds that one can obtain the most information about the Hurwitz scheme and its
compactiﬁcation by exploiting interchangeably these two points of view.
Our ﬁrst main result is the following
Theorem: Let b,d,a n d g be integers such that b =2 d +2 g − 2, g ≥ 5 and d> 2g +4 .
Let H be the Hurwitz scheme over Z[ 1
b! ] parametrizing coverings of the projective line of
degree d with b points of ramiﬁcation. Then Pic(H) is ﬁnite.
Remark: The number g in the statement of the Theorem is the genus of the “curve C
upstairs” of the coverings in question. Note, however, that the Hurwitz scheme H,a n d
hence also the genus g, are completely determined by b and d.
This Theorem is stated in §6.7, of the text. Note that although in the statement of the
Theorem here in the introduction, we spoke of “the” Hurwitz “scheme,” there are in fact
several diﬀerent Hurwitz schemes used in the literature, some of which are, in fact, not
schemes, but stacks. For details about the particular type of Hurwitz scheme for which
the main theorem is proved, we refer the reader to the exact statement in §6.7, as well as
to §1 which explains the notation. Finally, we should address the issue of what happens if
d ≤ 2g + 4. Although our proof uses the somewhat leisurely lower bound of 2g +4 ,i tm a y
be possible to prove the same result for smaller d using essentially the same techniques,
but being just a bit more careful. Since at the time this paper was written, the author
was not particularly interested in this issue, he has allowed himself the luxury of takingd
to be greater than 2g +4 .
The main idea of the proof is that by combinatorially analyzing the boundary of
the compactiﬁcation of the Hurwitz scheme, one realizes that there are essentially three
kinds of divisors in the boundary, which we call excess divisors (§4.7), which are “more
important” than the other divisors in the boundary in the sense that the other divisors
map to sets of codimension ≥ 2 under various natural morphisms. On the other hand, we
can also consider the moduli stack G (§6.1) of pairs consisting of a smooth curve of genus
g, together with a linear system of degreed and dimension 1. The subset of G consisting of
those pairs that arise from Hurwitz coverings is open in G, and its complement consists of
three divisors, which correspond precisely to the excess divisors. Using results of Harer on
the Picard group ofM
g, we show that these three divisors onG form a basis ofPic(G)⊗ZQ,
and in fact, we even compute explicitly (§7) the matrix relating these three divisors on G
to a certain standard basis of Pic(G) ⊗Z Q. The above Theorem then follows formally.
2

Crucial to our study of the Hurwitz scheme is its compactiﬁcation by means of ad-
missible coverings, a notion introduced in [19]. In [19], the existence of a coarse moduli
scheme of such coverings is stated. However, we could not follow a certain key step in the
construction of this coarse moduli scheme, and so we decided that it would be best to give
a treatment of such coverings independent of [19]. In fact, we study a more general sort
of admissible covering than [19], between stable curves of arbitrary genus, and we prove a
rather general theorem (§3.22) concerning the existence of a canonical logarithmic (in the
sense of [21]) algebraic stack (A,M
A) parametrizing such coverings:
Theorem: Fix nonnegative integers g, r, q, s, d such that 2g − 2+ r = d(2q − 2+ s) ≥ 1.
Let A be the stack over Z deﬁned as follows: For a scheme S, the objects of A(S) are
admissible coverings π : C → D of degree d from a symmetrically r-pointed stable curve
(f : C → S;μf ⊆ C) of genus g to a symmetrically s-pointed stable curve (h : D → S;μh ⊆
D) of genus q; and the morphisms of A(S) are pairs of S-isomorphisms α : C → C and
β : D → D that stabilize the divisors of marked points such that π◦α = β◦π.T h e n A is a
separated algebraic stack of ﬁnite type over Z.M o r e o v e r ,A is equipped with a canonical log
structure MA →O A, together with a logarithmic morphism (A,M A) → MS
log
q,s (obtained
by mapping (C;D;π) ↦→ D) which is log ´etale (always) and proper over Z[ 1
d! ].
Now we summarize what we do section by section. In §1, we deﬁne various Hurwitz
schemes as well as certain auxiliary objects to be used later. All of these objects have
both “combinatorial” (corresponding to the ﬁrst point of view) and “algebro- geometric”
(corresponding to the second point of view) deﬁnitions. In §2, we use the combinatorial
point of view to prove the irreducibility of many of the objects of §1. In §3, we discuss
admissible coverings from the point of view of log schemes, and prove the Theorem just
stated above. In §4, the culmination of our exploitation of the combinatorial point of view,
we explicitly enumerate and construct the divisors at inﬁnity of the compactiﬁcation, and
begin the determination of the the divisor class group of the Hurwitz scheme.
From then on, we switch gears to the second, or more algebro-geometric, point of
view. In §5, we prepare for this by reviewing certain relevant cohomological results. In
§6, we carry out a detailed study of the “excess divisors” at inﬁnity and thereby complete
the proof of the ﬁniteness of the divisor class group of the Hurwitz scheme, modulo a
technical result from the next Section. Finally, in §7, to make our understanding of the
excess divisors more explicit, we carry out certain calculations relating the excess divisors
to other, better known line bundles, which also serve to complete the proof of the technical
result needed earlier.
§8 is purely conjectural and proposes possible applications of the results discussed
previously to prove arithmetic results. In particular, the explicit calculations of§7 suggest
a possible application to an eﬀective form of the Mordell conjecture.
The reader who is interested in the circle of ideas dealt with in this paper may also
consult the related work of Arbarello, Harris, and Diaz on Severi varieties; see, for instance,
[18]. Although the results of [18] are not literally the same as ours, they are certainly
3

closely philosophically related. Also, D. Edidin has been preparing a paper that gives
similar results, although at the present time, I have not yet seen this paper. Finally,
although we treat here the case when the dimension of the Hurwitz scheme is rather large,
when the dimension is very small (i.e., 1 or 2), one has the results of [6] and [7].
An earlier version of this paper was submitted as my doctoral dissertation at Princeton
University in the spring of 1992. I would like to thank my advisor, Prof. G. Faltings, both
for suggesting the topic and for his advice and support during my years as a graduate
student. Also, although none of our conversations contributed directly to the material
in this paper, my general understanding of algebraic geometry proﬁted greatly from my
numerous conversations with Prof. N. Katz; I would, therefore, like to express here my
thanks to him, as well. Next, I would like to thank Prof. K. Kato for explaining the notion
of a log structure to me during the summer of 1991. Finally, I would like to express my
deep gratitude to Profs. K. Saito and Y. Ihara for encouraging me to publish this paper,
despite substantial opposition in certain parts of the algebraic geometry community to the
use of stacks.
§1. Diﬀerent Types of Hurwitz Schemes
§1.1. The original purpose of the Hurwitz scheme is to parametrize coverings of the
projective line that have at most simple branch points. However, since there are several
diﬀerent versions of the Hurwitz schemes running around in the literature, we take the
opportunity here to standardize and make explicit which version we are using at any
particular time. Also, it is necessary to construct Hurwitz-type schemes which parametrize
coverings with worse ramiﬁcation than “simple branch points”. These generalized Hurwitz
schemes will aid in our elucidation of the geometry at inﬁnity of the ordinary Hurwitz
scheme. We shall omit some details here since we are essentially reviewing well-known
material. For more details, see [13].
§1.2. Remark on characteristic p: In general, in this part of the paper, we will work
over the ring Z[
1
N ], where N is divisible by all numbers characteristic to the problem.
Thus there will be no essential diﬀerence between what we do and what one would do if
one were to work over characteristic zero. Indeed, we shall often prove some results by
reducing to the case of characteristic zero.
Remark on Stacks: We will need to employ the notion of an “algebraic stack” (which we
will henceforth call simply a “stack” for short) in the sense of Deligne-Mumford [8]; the
reader who is not satisﬁed with the treatment given in [8] may also refer to Chapter 1,§4,
of [11] for basic facts about stacks. In fact, (see [11], Chapter 1, §4.10) ´etale locally, every
stack can be formed by taking quotients (in the sense of stacks) of schemes by ﬁnite group
actions. We explain what this means as follows: LetS be a noetherian scheme; letX be an
S-scheme of ﬁnite type; let G be a ﬁnite group acting on X by means ofS-automorphisms.
4

Then we shall denote by [X/G] the algebraic stack deﬁned by “taking the quotient of X
by G in the sense of stacks.”
Concretely, relative to the “Working Deﬁnition of Algebraic Stacks” given in [11],
Chapter 1, §4.9, [X/G] is deﬁned as follows: In the notation of loc. cit. , it suﬃces to
specify schemes R and U, together with morphisms s, t: R → U,a n dμ : R ×U,t,s R → R.
For U, we take X;f o rR, we take G × X (i.e., a disjoint union of copies of X indexed by
the elements of G). For t : R → U, we take the morphism G × X → X that deﬁnes the
group action. For s : R → U,w et a k et h ep r o j e c t i o nG × X on the second factor. For
μ : R ×U,t,s R =( G × X) ×X (G × X) → R = G × X, we take the morphism that sends
(g1,x) × (g2,g1x)t o( g2g1,x). Once checks easily that all the necessary hypotheses are
satisﬁed.
Now let us suppose that X = Spec(A)i s aﬃne. In [11], Theorem 4.10, a general
method is described for passing from a noetherian algebraic stack to an associated coarse
moduli space (which is general is just an algebraic space, not necessarily a scheme). If one
applies this Theorem to the algebraic stack [ X/G] just constructed, one sees easily that
one obtains the schemeY = Spec(A
G)( w h e r eAG ⊆ A is the subring of functions invariant
under the action of G) as the coarse moduli space associated to [X/G].
§1.3. We start with the ordinary Hurwitz scheme. Let b,d,a n dg be natural numbers
subject to the relation 2( g − 1) = −2d + b,w i t hb ≥ 4. Psychologically, g is the the
genus of the curve upstairs, b is the number of branch point of the covering, and d is the
degree of the covering. Suppose we wish to parametrize sets of b distinct points of P1.
Let R = Z[ 1
b! ]. (The reason for inverting these primes is so that all of our coverings of
degree b or d will have tame ramiﬁcation, as well as Galois closures which are generically
separable.) Then there are (at least) four ways of doing this: we consider the category C
of R-schemes and the stack (in fact, a covariant functor in the ﬁrst three cases) onC,t h a t
assigns to S (an object of C) one of the four following categories (or sets in the ﬁrst three
cases):
(1) “UOb” (=“unrigidiﬁed ordered”): ordered sets of sections σ1,...,σ b :
S → S × P1 (i.e., such that composing further with the ﬁrst projection
S × P1 → S is the identity) such that the images of σi and σj do not
intersect when i ̸= j;
(2) “USb” (=“unrigiﬁed symmetrized”): divisors D ⊆ S × P1 ´etale over S
of degree b;
(3) “ROb” (=“rigidiﬁed ordered”): isomorphism classes of ordered sets
of sections as in (1), where by “isomorphism” we mean that we re-
gard {σ
1,...,σ b} as isomorphic to {σ′
1,...,σ ′
b} if there exists an S-
automorphism of S × P1 that carries {σ1,...,σ b} to {σ′
1,...,σ ′
b};
(4) “RSb” (=“rigidiﬁed symmetrized”): the stack whose objects are ´etale
divisors in P1-bundles (in the ´etale topology) over S, and whose mor-
phisms are isomorphisms of P1-bundles that preserve the designated
5

divisors. Put another way, this stack is the stack obtained by taking the
quotient (in the sense of stacks) of the functor deﬁned in (3) by the nat-
ural action of S
b (the symmetric group on b letters) given by permuting
the marked sections.
Although the use of the terminology “rigidiﬁed” here may at ﬁrst appear counterintuitive
in the sense that often one adds a “rigidifying structure,” then forms the quotient by
the action of some algebraic group, here we chose to use this terminology in the sense
that “rigidiﬁcation” consists in ﬁxing the ﬁrst three points at 0,1, and ∞ ,w h e r e a si n
the “unrigidiﬁed situation” all the points are ﬂoating around freely, hence not ﬁxed or
rigidiﬁed.
It is elementary that each of the above four functors is representable by a smooth,
quasi-compact stack (in fact, a scheme for the ﬁrst three functors) over R. Namely:
(1) UO
b: Here we simply take (P1)b −{ diagonals}.
(2) USb: We form the quotient by the action of Sb, the symmetric group
on b letters acting on UOb by permuting the b factors of P1, to obtain
the appropriate scheme, which may be naturally regarded as an open
subset of P
b, namely, the complement of the discriminant locus.
(3) ROb: For 1 ≤ i, j ≤ b − 3w i t hi ̸= j,l e tΔ ij ⊆ (P1)b−3 be the (i, j)-
diagonal. Let pi :( P1)b−3 → P1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ b − 3b et h eith projection.
Then
(P1)b−3 −
{(⋃
i̸=j
Δ ij
)
∪
(⋃
i
p−1
i ({0,1, ∞} )
)}
does the job.
(4) RSb: Clearly Sb acts on ROb in such a way that the action is generi-
cally free. If we form the quotient by this action in the sense of stacks
(as reviewed in §1.2), we obtain the desired algebraic stack, which is
generically a scheme.
We will refer to any one of these four schemes (resp. functors, stacks as “b-point schemes
(resp. functors, stacks)”, preﬁxing this term with the appropriate descriptives “rigidiﬁed”,
“ordered”, etc. when necessary, and omitting the “b” when speaking generally. These four
b-point stacks ﬁt into the following commutative diagram:
UO
b −→ U S b
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
ROb −→ R S b
(Diagram 1.1A)
6

Note that the vertical arrows are PGL(2)-torsors, while the horizontal arrows are Sb-
torsors. Thus, when we tensor with C and take the topological fundamental group, we
get:
πtop
1 (UOb,C) −→ πtop
1 (USb,C)
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
πtop
1 (ROb,C) −→ πtop
1 (RSb,C)
(Diagram 1.1B)
Here the horizontal arrows are injections and the vertical arrows are surjections; also, by
“topological fundamental group,” we mean in the sense of stacks, i.e., the fundamental
group formed by considering ´etale coverings of the stack in question by analytic stacks.
Finally, let us note that USb is used in [13], while ROb is used in [19].
Let T be any one of the four b-point stacks (resp. schemes). Then to T, we may
associate a Hurwitz stack H in such a way that H is ´etale over T, hence representable by
an algebraic stack. Indeed, consider the following stacks (which are schemes in the ﬁrst
three cases, so long as d ≥ 2) over C:
(1) HUO
b,d: data of the following form: an arrow α : C → P1 in the
category of S-schemes such that the induced arrowC → S is a smooth,
geometrically connected, proper curve of genus g, and whereα is ﬂat of
degree d with simple ramiﬁcation (i.e., the discriminant divisor is ´etale
over the base – see [13],§5) exactly at given sectionsσ1,...,σ b : S → P1,
where the σi’s are mutually disjoint S-sections;
(2) HUSb,d: same sort of data as above except that instead of theσi’s, we
are given a divisor D ⊆ S × P1 which is ﬁnite ´etale over S of degree d,
at which the simple ramiﬁcation is to take place;
(3) HROb,d: isomorphism classes of the data in (1), where isomorphisms
involve automorphisms overS of P1 that carry one set of sections to the
other, and over which there is an isomorphism of the respective curves
C;
(4) HRS
b,d: stack whose objects are collections of data as in (2), except
that we replace S ×P1 by an arbitraryP1-bundle in the ´etale topology,
and whose morphisms are isomorphisms ofP1-bundles that preserve the
designated divisors and over which lies an isomorphism of the respective
curves C.
We see easily by Grothendieck’s representability theorem (as applied in [13], §6) that all
four of these Hurwitz stacks are relatively representable by ´ etale morphisms over their
respective b-point schemes. The key fact in the proof of loc. cit. (and proven there on p.
566) is the following result, whose proof we repeat here for the convenience of the reader
(in a slightly more general form):
7

Lemma : Let k be an algebraically closed ﬁeld, f : C → P1
k a covering of degree d ≥ 3,
where C is a smooth, connected, proper curve of genus ≥ 2 over k. We assume that C is
simply ramiﬁed over P1
k, except possibly at one point p ∈ P1
k, where we allow arbitrary
ramiﬁcation. If ϕ : C → C is an automorphism such that f ◦ϕ = f ,t h e nϕ = id.
Proof: (cf. [13], p. 548 — the problem with Fulton’s proof is that it apparently makes
use of the characteristic zero assumption, so we trivially generalize his proof here for the
sake of completeness). Let μ = H
1
´et(ϕ) denote the induced map on l-adic cohomology,
where l is diﬀerent from the characteristic ofk. Since, as in well-known the automorphism
group of C is ﬁnite, we see that μ must have eigenvalues that are roots of unity; hence
|Tr (μ)|≤ 2g (under any embedding of an algebraic closure of Qℓ into C). Thus, by the
Lefshetz ﬁxed point theorem, the number of ﬁxed points of ϕ is ≤ 2g + 2. But since ϕ
must ﬁx the ≥ (2g − 2) + 2d +1 − (d − 1) = 2g + d ≥ 2g +3b r a n c hp o i n t s ,w eh a v ea
contradiction unless ϕ = id. ⃝
Let us note that if T ′ is another b-point stack with corresponding Hurwitz stack H′,a n d
if T ′ → T is one of the arrows in Diagram 1.1A, then we have H′ = H ×T T ′.
§1.4. We are now going to deﬁne generalizations of the Hurwitz stacks, namely, “de-
generate Hurwitz stacks”, which we shall use to make explicit the compactiﬁcation of the
original Hurwitz stacks. We start by deﬁning “degenerate b-point stacks”. The reason for
the use of the descriptor “degenerate” will become clear once these Hurwitz-type stacks
are deﬁned. As usual, we have four types, of which the ﬁrst three are schemes:
(1) DUO
b: We take UOb.
(2) DUSb: Let Sb−1 act on the ﬁrst b − 1 sections of UOb. Then take the
quotient of UOb by this action. Note that (1) and (2) can be deﬁned
also for b =3 .
(3) DROb: We take ROb,w h e nb ≥ 4. When b = 3, we take RO3 =
Spec R.
(4) DRSb: As before Sb−1 acts on ROb. Take the quotient by this action
in the sense of stacks if b ≥ 4. When b = 3, take RS3 =S p e c R .
As before, there is a functorial interpretation of these degenerate b-point stacks. We leave
it to the reader to work out this interpretation in terms of various sorts of collections of
sections of divisors in P
1. In this interpretation, we shall call the ﬁrst b − 1 sections (resp.
the ´etale divisor induced by the ﬁrst b − 1 sections) the marking sections (resp. marking
divisor) and the last (i.e., bth) section the clutching section.
Now ﬁx σ ∈S d.L e t T = one of the degenerate b-point stacks. Then we denote by
M ⊆ P1 × T (resp. C ⊆ P1 × T) the marking (resp. clutching) divisor. Let D = M ∪ C.
Then M, C,a n dD are relative T-divisors with normal crossings. Moreover, T is smooth
8

over our original ringR. Now by [29], Expos´e XIII, Appendice I, we can formF = R1
´etf∗Sd,
where U =( P1 × T) − D, f : U → T is the restriction of the projection to the second
factor π2 : P1 × T → T, and (by abuse of notation) Sd is the constant ´etale sheaf in
noncommutative groups on U with ﬁbre Sd:
U ⊆ P1 × T ⊇ D ⊇ M,C
f ↘
⏐⏐↓π2
T
Thus F is a ﬁnite ´etale covering of T. Write g : F→ T. For each geometric point t of
T, g−1(t) can be identiﬁed with Hom′(πalg
1 (P1
t − Dt), Sd), where the “prime” after the
Hom means “up to inner automorphism” (thus exempting us from the need to choose a
base point for our π1). Let us consider the closed and open substack K⊆F ,w h i c hi sa l s o
ﬁnite ´etale over T and which is such that if k = g|K,t h e nk−1(t) can be identiﬁed with
those homomorphisms ϕ : πalg
1 (P1
t − Dt) →S d such that:
(1) ϕ is surjective.
(2) ϕ takes the generators of the monodromy groups around the marked
points to transpositions.
(3) ϕ takes the generator of the monodromy group around the clutching
point to a conjugate of σ.
Then K will be our degenerate Hurwitz stack, which we shall denote, depending on the
situation by DHUOσ
b,d; DHUS σ
b,d; DHROσ
b,d;o r DHRSσ
b,d (of which all but the last are
schemes). Note that the degenerate Hurwitz stacks corresponding to conjugate σ may be
naturally identiﬁed.
§1.5. Remark: Unlike the original Hurwitz stacks, it is not clear (at least to the
author) that these degenerate Hurwitz stacks should have any modular interpretation at
all. Indeed, the logic of [13], §1.4, 1.5, does not follow through here because of the more
complicated nature of the ramiﬁcation involved. The problem is that if we denote by
F what one might think is the appropriate modular stack (in terms of coverings of the
projective line), and by DH one of the degenerate Hurwitz stacks, we get morphisms α :
F→ D H (clear) and β : DH → F (by the “pseudo-universal” covering to be constructed
in the following paragraph) and one can show that α ◦β =1
DH, hence that α is smooth.
But in order to show that it is ´etale, one needs, in the case of simple coverings, the fact
that the discriminant divisor is ´etale; since one does not have this fact here, one cannot
follow through as before.
However, if DH is one of the degenerate Hurwitz stacks, we can construct what one
might call a “pseudo-universal” covering as follows. (Here we use the term “pseudo-
universal” loosely in the sense that although DH does not actually represent the moduli
9

stack F of coverings of a certain type (in which case the tautological covering over DH
would be called simply “universal”), at least over each closed point of DH the “pseudo-
universal” covering “is” the covering corresponding to that closed point). Indeed, it is
tautological that there exists an ´etale covering ψ : V→ (P1 ×D H) − DDH such that the
normalization V→ P1 ×D H of P1 ×D H in V is what we want. The only thing that is
nonobvious is that V is a smooth,p r o p e rc u r v eo v e rDH. But smoothness follows from
the fact that DH is regular (since T is) and by applying Abhyankar’s lemma. Thus, to
summarize we have the following diagram:
C
η
−→ D H × P1 ⊇ DDH ⊇ MDH,C DH
ζ ↘
⏐⏐↓
DH
where C = V, ζ is smooth, proper, with geometrically connected ﬁbres, η is ﬂat, ´etale
outside of DDH,h a ssimple ramiﬁcation outside of CDH, and has ramiﬁcation of the type
prescribed by σ over CDH. In particular, by the Lemma of §1.3, it follows that if d ≥ 3,
then C has no automorphisms that ﬁx η.
§1.6. Finally, let us note as before that we have diagrams:
DUOb −→ D U S b
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
DROb −→ D R S b
(Diagram 1.2A)
where the vertical arrows arePGL(2)-torsors, and the horizontal arrows are Sb−1-torsors,
and
πtop
1 (DUOb,C) −→ πtop
1 (DUS b,C)
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
πtop
1 (DROb,C) −→ πtop
1 (DRSb,C)
(Diagram 1.2B)
where the vertical arrows are surjections, and the horizontal arrows are injections. Note
that if D′ →D is an arrow in the ﬁrst diagram, then with respect to degenerate Hurwitz
stacks and “pseudo-universal” curves, we have DH′ = DH ×D D′ and C′ = C× DH DH′.
Before continuing, we remark that although it is not absolutely necessary for what
follows to use all four versions of the Hurwitz scheme, we presented them here in this
introductory section in some detail so as to clarify which was which, since to the author’s
knowledge, there does not yet seem to exist either standard notation or standard termi-
nology in the literature that allows one to specify precisely which Hurwitz scheme one is
dealing with at any particular time.
10

§2. Irreducibility
§2.1. The ﬁrst topological invariant that one wishes to compute about a newly con-
structed object is its connectedness, or irreducibility. Here we show that HUS b,d and
DHUS σ
b,d – which are schemes, so long as d ≥ 3 – are geometrically irreducible over R.
It then follows from Diagrams 1.1A and 1.2A that the stacks HRSb,d and DHRSσ
b,d are
also geometrically irreducible over R. To prove irreducibility, we note that as in [13], pp.
546–7, we must show that the fundamental group of the appropriate b-point stack acts
transitively on the set corresponding to the ´etale covering which is the Hurwitz scheme; as
in loc. cit., we see that the fundamental group of the b-point stack has certain canonical
elements that correspond to “braiding” various pairs of points; hence we are reduced to
the following combinatorial Proposition.
§2.2. Proposition : Fix b, d ∈ N,σ ∈S
d.L e t Aσ
b,d be the set of ordered b-tuples of
transpositions {t1,...,t b} of Sd such that t1t2 ...t b = σ and such that the group generated
by the ti’s acts transitively on {1,...,d }. Deﬁne an “elementary move” on Aσ
b,d as an
automorphism of Aσ
b,d that takes {t1,...,t i,ti+1,...,t b} to {t1,...,t i+1,ti+1titi+1,...,t b}
for some i. Then the free group F generated by the elementary moves acts transitively on
Aσ
b,d.
(Psychological Remark: In the case of degenerate Hurwitz stacks, i.e. σ ̸= id,w h a tw e
have called b here really corresponds to b − 1 in the previous section.)
Notational Remark: We shall denote chains of transpositions by<?,?,..., ? >,w h e r ee a c h
of the question marks is a transposition, and we shall make elementary moves on such
chains, where we regard these chains as subchains of the originalb-tuple of transpositions.
It is clear that an elementary move on such a subchain corresponds to an elementary move
on the original b-tuple. We call two elements t, t
′ of Aσ
b,d equivalent if they lie in the same
domain of transitivity of F. We write t ∼ t′.
Bibliographical Remark: It has been brought to the author’s attention that similar results
were obtained using similar techniques in the classical papers of [4], [20], and [25], as well
as the more recent paper of [2].
§2.3. Lemma : We have the following relations:
(1) < (12),(23) > ∼ < (13),(12) >
(2) < (12),(23),(23) > ∼ < (12),(13),(13) >
(3) < (12),(13),(13) > ∼ < (13),(13),(12) >
(4) And lastly:
< (12),(12),(23),(23),(23),(23) >
∼ < (12),(12),(12),(12),(23),(23) >
11

Proof: For (1) to (3), we have < (12),(23) > ∼ < (23),(13) > ∼ < (13),(12) >.
Applying this twice, we get
< (12),(23),(23) > ∼ < (13),(13),(12) >
On the other hand,
< (12),(13),(13) > ∼ < (13),(23),(13) > ∼ < (13),(13),(12) >
Putting this together, we obtain (1) through (3). As for (4), one sees by (3) that, up to
equivalence, both sides of (4) are of the same form in the sense that they diﬀer only in
that the digits 1 and 3 have opposite roles on the two sides; moreover, a chain of this form
may be uniquely speciﬁed by stating which digit (i.e., of 1, 2, or 3) appears twice, which
four times, and which six times. For the left hand side, these are, respectively, (1,3,2); for
the right hand side, they are (3,1,2). Thus, if we think of the symmetric group on three
letters acting on chains of this form by permuting the digits 1, 2, and 3, we see that it
suﬃces to show that the left hand side is equivalent both to “(2 ,3,1)” and to “(1,2,3)”.
By the part of the lemma already proven, we have that the left hand side
< (12),(12),(23),(23),(23),(23) > ∼ < (12),(13),(13)
,(13),(13),(12) > =
what we have referred to as “(2,3,1)”. Since < (12),(23) > ∼ < (23),(13) >,w eh a v e
that the left hand side
< (12),(12),(23),(23),(23),(23) >
∼ < (23),(13),(13),(23),(23),(23) >
∼ < (13),(13),(23),(23),(23),(23) >
by (3). But this last chain is just “(1 ,2,3)”. ⃝
§2.4. Lemma : Let α,β ∈{ 1,...,d } with α ̸= β.L e t t ∈ Aσ
b,d.T h e n t ∼ t′ such
that t′
1 =( αβ).
Proof: Let us note ﬁrst that by the transitivity assumption on elements of Aσ
b,d,w ek n o w
that α and β must appear somewhere as digits in the transpositions of t. By elementary
moves, we can assume that t1 contains α; by subsequent elementary moves toward the
front, and the transitivity assumption on elements ofAσ
b,d, we may assume that t is of the
following form:
t1 =( αx2),t2 =( x2x3),t3 =( x3,x4),...,t i =( xixi+1),...,t r =( xr β),w i t h r ≤ b
Here the xi’s are distinct from each other and from α and β.N o ww eh a v e
< (αx3),(αx2) > ∼ < (αx2),(x2x3) > = <t 1,t2 >
12

so by substituting < (αx3),(αx2) > for <t 1,t2 >, moving the ti’s for 3 ≤ i ≤ r down one
position to the left, and sending (what would originally have been) (αx2) out to the right
beyond what was tr, we see that we obtain the same situation as what we started with,
except that r is one less than it was before. Now apply induction. ⃝
§2.5. Let us prove the Proposition ﬁrst in the case of the nondegenerate Hurwitz stack,
i.e., when σ = id.L e tt ∈ A(id)
b,d .W e s h a l l s h o w t h a tt ∼ a chain which consists of a nonzero,
even number of (12)’s, followed by a nonzero, even number of (23)’s, and so on through
(d − 1,d). By Lemma 3, (4), all such chains are equivalent, so we are done.
By transitivity, Lemma 4 allows us to assume that t
1 = (12),t2 = (12) on account of
the fact that σ = id. By using inverse elementary moves to bring things to the front, we
may assume that t3,...,t r contain a “1”, but that ti (∀i>r ) do not. We claim that we
may move to a situation where (with possibly a newr) t3,...,t r are all equal to (12). For,
if there is an i such that 3 ≤ i ≤ r − 1a n dti =( 1a),ti+1 =( 1b)w i t h1 ̸= a ̸= b,t h e n
< (1a),(1b) > ∼ < (1b),(ab) >, so we can reduce to the same situation with lower r.
Thus we may assume that t3 = t4 = ... = tr.I f t3 = (12), then we have proven the claim.
If t3 =( 1a)w i t ha ̸= 2, then it is easy to see that r must be even (since ti (∀i>r )
doesn’t contain a “1”); hence, applying Lemma 3, (2), proves the claim. Now repeating
the above procedure ﬁnishes the proof for σ = id.
§2.6. P r o o fo fP r o p o s i t i o n2 :
Step A: First we introduce some notation. Write σ = γ1 ...γ r where each
γi =( a(i)
1 ,a(i)
2 ,...,a (i)
ei )
is a nontrivial cycle with domain of transitivity Δ i such that Δ i
⋂Δ j = ∅for i ̸= j.L e t
q = r + d − (∑r
i=1 ei),N =( ∑r
i=1 ei) − r.T h e n l e t t h e Δi for r +1 ≤ i ≤ q be the
remaining trivial domains of transitivity of σ. For simplicity, let’s write 1 i,2i,e t c . f o r
a(i)
1 ,a(i)
2 ,... . Now deﬁne
Zi =< (1i2i),(1i3i),(1i4i),..., (1i(ei)i) >∈ Aγi
(ei−1),ei
Let N denote the concatenation of chains Z1, Z2,..., Zr.
Now let t ∈ Aσ
b,d. By Lemma 4, we see that we may assume that t begins with N.
(Note that this same logic already proves the Proposition for Aγi
(ei −1),ei
.) Thus we have
normalized t1,...,t N . It remains to deal with ti for i>N .
Step B: Let D1,..., Ds (⊆{ 1,...,d }) be the domains of transitivity of the group gen-
erated by the ti,f o r i>N ,( s o ⋃s
i=1 Di = {1,...,d } and Di
⋂ Dj = ∅∀ i ̸= j). For
1 ≤ j ≤ s,l e t
Pj =
{
i ∈{ 1,...,b }| i>N a n d t i acts nontrivially on Dj
}
13

Note that if we take the subchain τj of transpositions of t indexed by Pj,t h e nτj ∈
A(id)
|Pj |,|Dj |.B y §2.5, we may assume that τj consists of a sequence of pairs of identical
transpositions. Now we claim:
Claim : If q ̸= 1, then we may assume that everyti (∀i>N ) is of the form (xy)w i t h
x ∈ Δ k,y ∈ Δ l,k ̸= l.
P r o o fo fC l a i m:Suppose we have a pairti = ti+1 =( ab), where i ≡ N +1 ( mod 2)
and a, b ∈ Δ k with a ̸= b.S i n c e a l l t h eti’s together generate a group transitive on
{1,...,d }, there exists a j>N with j ≡ N +1 ( mod 2) such that tj = tj+1 =( cd)
with c ∈ Δ k and d ∈ Δ l where l ̸= k.W e m a y m o v eti,ti+1 so that they are adjacent to
tj,tj+1 (by Lemma 3, (3)), so we obtain:
< (cd),(cd),(ab),(ab) >
By Lemma 7A below, we may assume thatb = c. Then applying Lemma 3, (2), with 1,2,3
replaced by d, c, a, respectively, we have
< (cd),(cd),(ac),(ac) > ∼ < (cd),(cd),(ad),(ad) >
Repeating this procedure proves the claim. ⃝
§2.7. Lemma A : Suppose in the above situation (except that q might be one) that
we have a pair ti = ti+1 =( ab) with i ≡ N +1 ( mod 2),a n d a, b ∈ Δ k,a ̸= b.T h e n w e
may move to the same situation, except with a =1 k,b =2 k.
Proof: We may assume that with respect to the ordering 1 k < 2k < 3k < ... ,w eh a v e
a<b . By moving around chunks of t that commute with each other, we may assume that
i = N +1a n dw em a ym o v eZk right up to the left of tN+1:
t = Z1Z2 ... Zk ... ZrtN+1tN+2 ...t b
⏐⏐↓goes to
t = Z1Z2 ... Zk−1Zk+1 ... Zr ZktN+1tN+2 ...t b
Suppose a ̸=1 k. Since we have shown the Proposition for Aγk
(ek −1),ek
, we may assume that
Zk ends with the transposition
(
(a − 1),a
)
. By Lemma 3, (2),
<
(
(a − 1),a
)
,(ab),(ab) > ∼ <
(
(a − 1),a
)
,
(
(a − 1),b
)
,
(
(a − 1),b
)
>
By repeating this procedure many times, we can assume that a =1 k. Applying the same
process to b proves the Lemma. ⃝
14

Lemma B : In the above situation, suppose that we have a pair ti = ti+1 =( ab) (where
i ≡ N +1 ( mod 2))w i t ha ∈ Δ k and b ∈ Δ l,w h e r ek ̸= l. Then we may assume that
a =1 k,b =1 l.
Proof: Same as for Lemma A. ⃝
§2.8. By Lemma 7B and the claim at the end of §2.6, if q ̸= 1, then we may assume
that every ti (for i>N ) is of the form (1 k1l)f o rk ̸= l.I f q =1 ,t h e nΔ1 = {1,...,d }
and we may assume that everyti (for i>N ) is of the form (1121). Thus if q =1 ,w eh a v e
found a standard normalizing form for t, so the Proposition has been proved.
If q ̸= 1, then we note that if we regard (1k1l) as an element of the permutation group
of the symbols Δ1,..., Δ q, then the ti’s (for i>N ) act transitively on the Δj’s (since all
the ti’s together act transitively on {1,...,d }); on the other hand, tN+1tN+2 ...t b =( id).
Thus we are in the situation of dealing with an element of A(id)
(b−N),q. But the Proposition
has already been proven in this case. Thus we are done. ⃝
§2.9. For ease of reference, we restate the main result of this section as a Theorem:
Theorem : For all b, d ∈ N such that b ≥ 3, and all σ ∈S d,w eh a v et h a tHUS b,d;
DHUS σ
b,d; HRSb,d;a n d DHRSσ
b,d are all geometrically irreducible over R.
§2.10. We now turn to the proof of another similar irreducibility result which will be
useful later. Let us recall the situation of of §1.5:
C
β
−→ D × P1 ⊇ CD
α ↘
⏐⏐↓γ
D
⏐⏐↓
T
(Here T is the relevant degenerate b-pointed stack.) By §4.3, we see that the reduced
inverse image E of CD via β is ´etale over CD ∼= D. (We placed this Lemma in §4i nw h i c h
it is more in context, since this Section is concerned primarily with combinatorics.) Thus
E→ T is an ´etale covering. It is clear that the portions of E that correspond to diﬀerent
ramiﬁcation indices form diﬀerent connected components, even over R.I n f a c t , w e h a v e
the following result:
Proposition : The geometric (i.e., after tensoring from R up to C) connected com-
ponents of E are in one-to-one correspondence with the set of ramiﬁcation indices over
C
D , which is the same as the set of cardinalities of domains of transitivity of σ,w h e r e
D = DHUS σ
b,d or DHRSσ
b,d.
15

Proof: As before, we consider the action of braiding elements of the fundamental group of
T on the set B corresponding to the ´etale covering E→T . Simple reﬂection reveals that
B may be given the following description: B consists of the set of pairs {(t1,...,t b−1),Δ }
where (t1,...,t b−1) ∈ Aτ
b−1,d,w i t hτ conjugate to σ and Δ a domain of transitivity of τ.
The action of braiding on the ﬁrstb −1 factors clearly doesn’t aﬀectτ, and acts via an
“elementary move” on the Aτ
b−1,d part and trivially on Δ. The action of double braiding
between the last two factors clearly takes the domain of transitivity Δ of τ to the domain
of transitivity tb−1(Δ) of tb−1τtb−1. By Proposition 2, we can take any given element ofB
to an element with tb−1 arbitrary via braiding in the ﬁrst b − 1 factors. By doing this and
then double braiding in the last two factors, it is thus clear that we can take any domain
of transitivity Δ of τ to any other domain of transitivity of τ with the same cardinality.
This completes the proof.⃝
§3. Log Admissible Coverings
§3.1. In this paper, we will be interested in studying not only the various Hurwitz
stacks introduced in §1, but also their compactiﬁcations. In [19], a deﬁnition of an “ad-
missible covering” is proposed as a means of compactifying the Hurwitz scheme HRO
b,d.
Unfortunately, since Harris-Mumford are interested only in the coarse moduli scheme of
such admissible coverings, their deﬁnition of an admissible covering is not well suited to
the study of families and the construction of an algebraic stack of admissible coverings.
The main reason for this is that the natural context in which to study such admissible
coverings is not the category of schemes, but rather that of log schemes, as deﬁned by
Kato in [21]. Thus, in this Section, we propose to give a foundational treatment of log
admissible coverings. In particular, we prove a rather general existence theorem for a log
algebraic stack of such coverings. If we forget the log structure of this log algebraic stack,
and consider the associated coarse moduli space (as in [11], Theorem 4.10), we recover the
coarse moduli scheme of Harris-Mumford.
Remark: In an earlier version of this paper, we referred to the proof of [19] in our construc-
tion of a moduli stack of admissible coverings. Indeed, the existence of such an algebraic
moduli stack is essentially a formal consequence of what [19] claim to have proven. How-
ever, various people who read that earlier version complained bitterly that they could not
follow the proof in [19]. Upon closer inspection, the author discovered a counterexample
to one of the key claims in the proof of the existence of a coarse moduli scheme in [19]
(see §3D below for more details). Thus, it seems that at this point, one must consider the
proof of this result in [19] to be incomplete. In light of this situation, the author decided
that it would be best to give a detailed treatment of the existence of an algebraic moduli
stack of admissible coverings that is independent of what is done in [19].
16

§3A. Basic Deﬁnitions
§3.2. We start by reviewing Knudsen’s notion of an r-pointed stable curve. Let S be
a scheme.
Deﬁnition: A ﬂat, proper morphism f : C → S of schemes together with r sections
σ1,...,σ r : S → C is called an r-pointed stable curve of genus g if
(1) the geometric ﬁbres Cs of f are connected, reduced, of dimension 1,h a v e
dimk(s) H1(Cs, OCs )= g, and have at most ordinary double points as
singularities;
(2) the images of the sections σ1,...,σ r are disjoint and land in the smooth
locus of f ;
(3) the relative dualizing sheaf ωC/S is relatively ample with respect to f .
We shall refer to the sections σ1,...,σ r as the marked points of f : C → S, and to the
divisor in C deﬁned by the union of the σi as the divisor of marked points.
Note that the ampleness condition (3) implies that 2g − 2+ r ≥ 1. [22] shows that there
exists a smooth, proper (over Z) moduli stack for such data, which we shall denote by
Mg,r.T h o s er-pointed stable curves for which C → S is smooth deﬁne an open substack
Mg,r ⊆ Mg,r. The complement of Mg,r in Mg,r is a divisor with normal crossings. We
shall call this divisor the divisor at inﬁnity of Mg,r.
We shall often ﬁnd it convenient to use the language oflog structuresand log schemes
of [21]. A log structure onS consists of an ´etale monoid M on S, together with a morphism
M →O S of monoids that satisﬁes certain properties. See [21] for more details. We shall
write the monoid operation on sections of M additively, and refer to the given morphism
M →O S as the exponential map of the log structure.
The divisor at inﬁnity of Mg,r thus deﬁnes (as in [21], §1.5, (1)) a log structure on
Mg,r which we shall call thecanonical log structure onMg,r. We shall denote the resulting
log stack by M
log
g,r .
Let MMg,r
denote the ´etale monoid that deﬁnes the canonical log structure on Mg,r.
Thus MMg,r
is precisely the subsheaf of OMg,r
consisting of functions invertible on Mg,r.
Let
GMg,r
⊆ MMg,r
be the subsheaf of functions whose zero locus is smooth (over Z). Thus, O×
Mg,r
⊆ GMg,r
,
and O×
Mg,r
acts freely on GMg,r
.L e tNMg,r
be the quotient MMg,r
/O×
Mg,r
.T h e n
17

ΓMg,r
def
= GMg,r
/O×
Mg,r
⊆ NMg,r
is a constructible sheaf of sets (in the ´etale topology). Finally, note that GMg,r
generates
the sheaf of monoids MMg,r
.
Let (C→ Mg,r;σ1,...,σ r : Mg,r →C ) denote the universal r-pointed stable curve
of genus g. It is shown in [22] that C may be naturally identiﬁed with Mg,r+1.L e t
us denote by Clog the log stack obtained by pulling back the canonical log structure on
Mg,r+1 relative to this identiﬁcation. We shall call this log structure on C the canonical
log structure on C. Note that the canonical log structure on C can also be obtained as
the log structure associated to the divisor with normal crossings which is the union of the
images of the σi, together with the pull-back via C→ Mg,r of the divisor at inﬁnity of
Mg,r. Thus, just as for Mg,r, we can deﬁne GC ⊆ MC and ΓC
def
= GC/O×
C ⊆ NC.
§3.3. When working in the logarithmic category, the following notion is more conve-
nient than the classical notion of Knudsen reviewed above. Let Slog be a ﬁne log scheme
(in the sense of [21], §2.3).
Deﬁnition: A morphism of log stacks κlog : Slog → M
log
g,r will be referred to as the
data for an r-pointed stable log-curve of genus g. For such a κlog ,l e t Clog → Slog be the
pull-back (in the logarithmic category) of the universal object Clog → M
log
g,r by means of
κlog . Such a Clog → Slog will be referred to as an r-pointed stable log-curve of genus g.
Note that for smooth curves, once one is given a classifying morphism κ : S →M g,r,
the resulting log morphism κlog : Slog → M
log
g,r is uniquely deﬁned ,s os m o o t hc u r v e sa n d
smooth log-curves are equivalent notions. However, if κ : S → Mg,r does not map into
Mg,r, then it is easy to construct examples of distinct log morphisms Slog → M
log
g,r with
the same underlying stack morphism κ : S → Mg,r. Nonetheless, given a morphism
κ : S → Mg,r, there always exists a natural choice of log structure on S for which κ
extends to a logarithmic morphism: namely, the pull-back of the log structure on M
log
g,r.
Now letClog → Slog be an r-pointed stable log-curve of genusg.L e tMC (respectively,
MS) denote the ´etale monoid deﬁning the log structure of Clog (respectively, Slog). Let
NC (respectively, NS) be the quotient MC/O×
C (respectively, MS/O×
S ). Then we obtain a
natural morphism from ΓC |C (respectively, ΓMg,r
|S), to NC (respectively, NS). We denote
the image of this morphism by ΓC (respectively, ΓS). Thus, Γ C (respectively, ΓS)f o r m s
a subsheaf (of sets) of NC (respectively, NS). Let GC (respectively, GS)b et h ei n v e r s e
image of ΓC (respectively, ΓS)i n MC (respectively, MS) via the projection MC → NC
(respectively, MS → NS). We shall call Γ C (respectively, ΓS; GC; GS)t h e sheaf of
generators of NC (respectively, NS; MC; MS).S i n c eΓC is a constructible sheaf of sets on
C, one can regard (see [28], p. 160) ΓC as a quasi-ﬁnite algebraic space over S.T h e nGC
deﬁnes an O×
ΓC -torsor, hence a line bundle LC on this algebraic space ΓC.
18

Finally, by forgetting log structures, we obtain anunderlying r-pointed stable curve of
genus g:( f : C → S;σ1,...,σ r : S → C).
§3.4. Sometimes it is convenient to forget the ordering on the marked points of a
pointed stable curve. That is to say, we have a natural action ofSr (the symmetric group
on r letters) on M
log
g,r given by permuting the marked points. If we form the quotient of
M
log
g,r
by Sr (in the sense of stacks), we thus obtain a log stack MS
log
g,r. Note that the
universal log-curve Clog → M
log
g,r descends to a log-curve CSlog → MS
log
g,r .L e t Slog be a
ﬁne log scheme.
Deﬁnition: A morphism of log stacks κlog : Slog → MS
log
g,r will be referred to as the data
for a symmetrically r-pointed stable log-curve of genus g. For such a κlog ,l e t Clog → Slog
be the pull-back (in the logarithmic category) of the universal object CSlog → MS
log
g,r by
means of κlog . Such a Clog → Slog will be referred to as a symmetrically r-pointed stable
log-curve of genus g. If we forget the log structures of such a log-curve, the resulting
(f : C → S;μf ⊆ C) (where μf ⊆ C is the divisor of marked points) will be referred to as
a symmetrically r-pointed stable curve of genus g.
For instance, when g = 0, the open substack MSg,r ⊆ MSg,r of smooth curves may be
identiﬁed with the stack RSb of §1.3.
§3.5. We are now ready to state the main deﬁnition of this Section. Let flog : Clog →
Slog (respectively, hlog : Dlog → Slog) be a symmetrizedr- (respectively,s-) pointed stable
log-curve of genus g (respectively, q). Let μf ⊆ C (respectively, μh ⊆ D) be the divisor of
marked points. Let πlog : Clog → Dlog be a morphism of log schemes.
Deﬁnition: We shall say that πlog : Clog → Dlog is a log admissible covering of degree
d if the following conditions are satisﬁed:
(1) πlog is log ´etale (in the sense of [21], §3.3); moreover, the morphism
π−1ND → NC induced by the morphism of log structures maps ΓD into
Γd
C
def
=
d⋃
i=1
i · ΓC
(2) π is ﬁnite;
(3) π is of degree d on a dense open set of every ﬁber of h : D → S;
(4) μf ⊆ π−1(μh); π−1(μh) ⊆ d · μf ;
(5) f is smooth at c ∈ C if and only if h is smooth at π(c).
19

We now make some trivial observations concerning log admissible coverings:
(1) Of the above conditions, only the ﬁrst depends on the log structures;
the rest depend only on the morphism of schemes π.
(2) Note that the second inclusion in condition (4) actually follows from
conditions (1) and (5).
(3) Let x ∈ C − μf be a point at which f is smooth. Let y = π(x). Then
the log structure on Clog (respectively, Dlog)a t x (respectively, y)i s
just the pull-back to C (respectively, D) of the log structure on Slog.I t
thus follows that π is ´etale at x.
(4) If hlog has the property that every irreducible component of every ge-
ometric ﬁber Ds of h is smooth, then flog also has this property.
§3.6. Suppose that now that ( f : C → S, μf ⊆ C)a n d( h : D → S, μh ⊆ D)a r e
symmetrically pointed stable curves. Then we make the following deﬁnition
Deﬁnition: A morphism π : C → D will be called an admissible covering if there exist,
´etale locally on S:
(1) a ﬁne log scheme Slog with underlying scheme S;
(2) symmetrically pointed stable log-curves Clog → Slog and Dlog → Slog
whose underlying symmetrically pointed stable curves are (f : C →
S, μf ⊆ C) and (h : D → S, μh ⊆ D);
(3) a log admissible covering πlog : Clog → Dlog whose underlying scheme
morphism is π
Remark: We shall see below that when D → S is of genus zero, the deﬁnition agrees with
that of [19], p. 57. The reason that we prefer this deﬁnition is that when considering
moduli of morphisms of curves, it is very diﬃcult to incorporate conditions that involve
the existence of certain local functions on the curves (as do the conditions given in [19],
p. 57). Since a log structure essentially involves some sort of complicated monoid-worth
of global (on the curve) line bundles, a morphism of log structures amounts to some sort
of morphism of line bundles, hence (as we shall see below) is relatively easy to consider
the moduli of. On the other hand, one draw-back of the above deﬁnition of an admissible
covering is that the log structure onS is not uniquely or canonically deﬁned. Nonetheless,
we shall see belowa posteriorithat, in fact, there does always exist a canonical log structure
on S with respect to which an admissible covering π extends to a log admissible covering.
20

§3B. First Properties
§3.7. Let A be a local noetherian henselian ring. Let s ∈ mA (the maximal ideal of
A). Let R be the henselization of A[X,Y ]/(XY − s)( w h e r eX and Y are indeterminates)
at the ideal generated by mA, X,a n dY .T h u s ,R is a local noetherian henselian ring,
with maximal ideal mR.L e t x, y ∈ R be the images of X and Y , respectively. Then we
have the following
Lemma: Suppose that we are given x′,y ′ ∈ R; s′ ∈ A such that x′y′ = s′,a n d
(x, y, mA)=( x′,y ′,mA) (equality of ideals in R). Then there exist units ux,uy ∈ R×
with uxuy ∈ A× such that either uxx = x′ and uyy = y′,o r uxx = y′ and uyy = x′.
Proof: Let us ﬁrst consider the case when s = 0. Then the Lemma follows immediately
from the simple structure of the ring A[[X,Y ]]/(XY ), and faithfully ﬂat descent from
A[[X,Y ]]/(XY )d o w nt oR. Now let us return to the case of arbitrary s. By considering
the ringR/sR = A/sA[[X,Y ]]/(XY ) (and applying the Lemma to this ring), it thus follows
that s′ ∈ (s). Moreover, without loss of generality, we may assume thatx′ = x + s · φ and
y′ = y + s · ψ,f o rs o m eφ, ψ∈ R. By multiplying x′ and y′, we thus obtain that s′ is equal
to s times a unit in R.S i n c eR is faithfully ﬂat over A, it follows that s′ is equal to s
times a unit in A. Thus, without loss of generality, we may assume that s′ = s.L e t R′
(respectively, A′) be the completion of R of (respectively, A). If we restrict ourselves to
ﬁnding ux and uy such thatuxuy = 1, then it follows from the deﬁnition of “henselization,”
that it suﬃces to prove the Lemma with R and A replaced by R′ and A′, respectively.
Let us review our situation: We havex′,y ′ ∈ R′ such that x′y′ = s and (x′,y ′,mA′ )=
(x, y, mA′ ). Suppose we know that x′ = x + sif; y′ = y + sig,f o rs o m ef,g ∈ R′,a n d
some positive integer i. By multiplying x′ and y′, we obtain thatx(sig)+ y(sif) ∈ si+1R′.
Thus, x + y annihilates the image of x(sig) ≡− y(sif)i n siR′/si+1R′.S i n c ex + y is a
regular element of R′, we thus obtain that xsig ≡ ysif ≡ 0. On the other hand, from
the structure of the module siR′/si+1R′ = siA′/si+1A′[[X,Y ]]/(XY ), one then obtains
that sif − sixα, sig − siyβ ∈ (si+1), for some α,β ∈ R′ such that α (respectively, β)i sa
power series in x (respectively, y). Now let us note that we can always make substitutions
of the following sort: replace x′ by x′ · u−1,a n dy′ by y′ · u (for some unit u ∈ (R′)×),
without aﬀecting the validity of the Lemma. Moreover, if we make such a substitution,
with u =1+ s
iα − siβ, we ﬁnd ourselves in the situation reviewed at the beginning of this
paragraph, except with i replaced by i+1. By induction (and the fact that R′ is complete
and separated in the s-adic topology), this completes the proof of the Lemma. ⃝
§3.8. We continue with the notation of the previous §.
Lemma: Suppose that there exist units ux,uy ∈ R× such that xux = x, yuy = y,a n d
uxuy ∈ A×. Then it follows that ux = uy =1 .
Proof: As in the previous §, we prove the Lemma with R and A replaced by their
completions R′ and A′. Suppose that we know that ux ≡ 1, uy ≡ 1 modulo siR′,
21

for some nonnegative integer i.L e t dx =1 − ux; dy =1 − uy.S i n c e xdx =0 ,
ydy = 0, it follows that we can write dx(mod si+1R′) (respectively, dy(mod si+1R′))
as a power series in positive powers of y (respectively, x) with coeﬃcients in siA′/si+1A′.
Moreover, dxdy =1 − ux − uy + uxuy = dx + dy +( uxuy − 1). It thus follows that
(uxuy − 1) ∈ A′ ⋂siR′ = siA′, hence that dx +dy ∈ siA′ +si+1R′. But from the represen-
tation of dx(mod si+1R′)a n ddy(mod si+1R′) as power series of the form just described,
it thus follows that dx,dy ∈ si+1R′. By induction (and the fact that R′ is complete and
separated in the s-adic topology), this completes the proof of the Lemma. ⃝
§3.9. We now consider a slightly diﬀerent deﬁnition of an “admissible covering,” which
is essentially the same as that of [19]. Let S be a scheme. Let ( f : C → S, μf ⊆ C)a n d
(h : D → S, μh ⊆ D) be symmetrically pointed stable curves. Then we make the following
deﬁnition
Deﬁnition: A morphism π : C → D will be called an HM-admissible covering if it
satisﬁes conditions (2) through (5) of the deﬁnition of a log admissible covering, as well as
the following condition, consisting of two parts, which we refer to together as “condition
(1
′)”: π is ´etale, except:
(1′A) over μh, where it exhibits tame ramiﬁcation
(1′B) over the singular points: if s ∈ S, λ is a node of Cs,a n dν = π(λ),t h e n
there exist a ∈ msh
S,s, x, y ∈ msh
C,λ,a n d u, v ∈ msh
D,ν, such that xy = a,
uv = ae, u = xe, v = ye (for some natural number e (necessarily
less than d) such that e ∈O ×
S,s)a n ds u c ht h a tx, y (respectively, u, v)
generate msh
f − 1(s),λ (respectively, msh
h− 1(s),ν). Here, by “ msh,” we mean
the maximal ideal of “ Osh,” the strict henselization of the local ring in
question.
Remark 1: Suppose that condition (1 ′B) is satisﬁed. Then let us assume that we are
given elements u′,v ′ ∈ msh
D,π(c) and b′ ∈ msh
S,s that satisfy u′v′ = b′ and that generate
msh
h− 1(s),d. Then we claim that there exist x′,y ′ ∈ msh
C,c, together with a′ ∈ msh
S,s that
satisfy (x′)e = u′;( y′)e = v′; x′y′ = a′. Indeed, this follows from the fact that the
unordered pair ( u′,v ′) diﬀers from the unordered pair ( u, v) by multiplication by units
(Lemma 7). Taking eth roots of these units (which is possible precisely because we are
working in the strict henselizations), then multiplying by the original x, y,a n da proves
the claim.
Remark 2: Note that unlike in [19], p. 57, in condition (1′B) above, we use strict henseliza-
tions rather than completions. The main reason for this is that strict henselizations are
often technically easier to work with. Moreover, whether one uses strict henselizations or
completions of strict henselizations (i.e., one wants the residue ﬁeld to be separably closed)
22

in condition (1 ′B) makes no diﬀerence. Indeed, this follows immediately from the argu-
ment of the preceding Remark: i.e., whether or not condition (1 ′B) holds is independent
of which u, v,a n db one chooses downstairs; thus, if one knows that a “good” set of u, v,
and b exist once one passes to the completion of the strict henselization, then it follows
that a “good” set already exists in the strict henselization.
§3.10. We retain the notations of the preceding §.L e t π : C → D be an HM-
admissible covering. We would now like to deﬁne a canonical log structure onS (determined
completely by π), over which π will extend to a log admissible covering πlog. First let us
denote byMup
S (respectively, Mdn
S ) the monoid which forms the log structure onS obtained
by pulling back that of MS
log
g,r (respectively, MS
log
q,s
) via the classifying morphism for
(f : C → S, μf ) (respectively, (h : D → S, μh)) .L e tMup
C (respectively, Mdn
D )d e n o t et h e
monoid which forms the log structure onC (respectively, D) obtained by pulling back that
of the universal symmetric stable log-curve. Next let us focus attention at a node λ ∈ Cs.
Let ν = π(λ). Let us suppose that we have x, y, u, v, a, eas in Condition (1′B)a b o v e .L e t
b = ae,s o uv = b. Let us choose sections (in an ´etale neighborhood of λ) log(x),lo g(y)o f
Mup
C , and a section log(a)o f Mup
S such that log(x)+ log(y)= log(a), and such that under
the exponential map, log(x), log(y), and log(a)m a pt ox, y,a n da, respectively. Note that
by Lemma 8, these properties determine log(x), log(y), and log(a)( as a triple) uniquely.
Similarly, we choose sections log(u), log(v), and log(b).
We would like to deﬁne a new log structure, whose monoid we denote by MS,o n S.
To do this, we note that, ´etale locally on S near s, the log structure Mup
S (respectively,
Mdn
S ) has a chart (in the sense of [21], §2.9) whose generators are indexed by the nodes
on Cs (respectively, Ds). More concretely, we may take, for the generator indexed by the
node λ (respectively, ν), the element log(a) (respectively, log(b)) just deﬁned. We then
deﬁne MS to be the log structure associated to the following quotient monoid:
(Mup
S × Mdn
S )/ ∼
where the equivalence relation “ ∼” is that generated by requiring that (0 ,lo g(b)) ∼ (e ·
log(a),0). By Lemmas 7 and 8, everything that we are doing is canonical, so even though we
deﬁned MS ´etale locally on S, (the log structure deﬁned by) MS descends to our original
S. This completes the construction of MS. Note that we have canonical morphisms
Mup
S → MS and Mdn
S → MS.
Now let us denote by (C,M C) (respectively, (D,M D)) the log scheme obtained as the
ﬁber product ( C,M up
C ) ×(S,Mup
S ) (S, MS) (respectively, (D,M dn
D ) ×(S,Mdn
S ) (S, MS)). We
would like to extend the morphism π to a morphism of log schemes
πlog :( C,M C) → (D,M D)
over (S, MS) which is a log admissible covering. We do this as follows. First note that away
from the nodes, π extends naturally to πlog since the only substantive part (i.e., not pulled
23

back from S) of the log structure is constituted by the divisors of marked points, which are
carried to each other (by the deﬁnition of an HM-admissible covering). Moreover, away
from the nodes, the log morphism π
log that we obtain is log ´etale, by condition (1′A)o f
the deﬁnition of an HM-admissible covering. Thus, it remains to deal with the nodes. We
can work ´etale locally, as long as we do things canonically. Thus, we focus attention at a
node λ of Cs, as above. Then the portion of the log structure of MD that does not come
from MS is generated (in a neighborhood of ν)b y log(u)a n d log(v). Thus, it suﬃces
to specify what happens to log(u)a n dlog(v) under (πlog)−1, and to check that what we
specify satisﬁes the relevant relations. We do this as follows: we send log(u)t o e · log(x)
and log(v)t o e · log(y). The only relation to be checked is log(u)+ log(v)= log(b), but
this is clearly preserved (by the deﬁnition of MS!). By Lemmas 7 and 8, everything is
canonical, so this morphism MD → MC descends to C. Moreover, by [21], Theorem 3.5,
it is clear that the morphism MD → MC thus deﬁned is log ´etale. Finally, since e ≤ d,
it follows that the log morphism πlog :( C,M C) → (D,M D) satisﬁes condition (1) of the
deﬁnition of a log admissible covering.
§3.11. We summarize the above discussion as follows.
Deﬁnition: We shall call the log structure MS on S the canonical log structure associated
to the (HM-)admissible covering π.
Proposition: A morphism π : C → D between symmetrically pointed stable curves
(f : C → S, μf ⊆ C) and (h : D → S, μh ⊆ D) is an HM-admissible covering if and only if
it is an admissible covering in the sense of Deﬁnition 6.
Proof: We have just shown the (nontrivial) “only if” part. The “if” part is trivial:
it follows immediately by writing out condition (1) of the deﬁnition of a log admissible
covering, i.e., what it means to have a log ´etale morphism. ⃝
§3.12. Before going on to the next subsection, we would like to consider brieﬂy how
admissible coverings behave over discrete valuation rings. Let S = Spec(A), where A is a
strict henselian discrete valuation ring.
Lemma: Let A be a strict henselian discrete valuation ring such that n ∈ A×.L e t
s ∈ A be a uniformizer. For each natural number i ≥ 1,l e t Ri be the strict henselization
of A[X,Y ]/(XY − si) at the maximal ideal m =( x, y, s) (where x, y are the images of
X, Y in Rn). (Here X and Y are indeterminates.) Let Wi = Spec(Ri) −{ m}.T h e n
π1(Wn) ∼= Z/nZ, and the universal cover W ∼
n of Wn is W1 with the map W ∼
n → Wn
induced by mapping x to xn and y to yn.
Proof: The map W1 → Wn is clearly ﬁnite ´etale with W1 connected. On the other hand,
R1 is a regular local ring, so π1(W1) is trivial. The lemma follows. ⃝
§3.13. We continue with the notations of the preceding §.L e t (f : C → S, μf ⊆ C)
and (h : D → S, μh ⊆ D) be symmetrically pointed stable curves over S that are smooth
over the generic point η of S.L e tπη : Cη → Dη be an admissible covering over η.T h e n
24

Lemma: There is at most one extension of πη to an admissible covering π : C → D
over S.I f d! ∈ A×, then (after possibly replacing A by a tamely ramiﬁed extension) there
exists an admissible covering π : C → D that extends πη.
Proof: The uniqueness statement follows immediately from the fact that Cη is schemat-
ically dense in C. Now we consider existence: Let C′ → S be the normalization of D
in Cη. By Abhyankar’s lemma, we may, after possibly replacing A by a tamely ramiﬁed
extension, assume that C′ → D is not ramiﬁed over the generic points of the special ﬁbre
of D. By purity of the branch locus, the only places whereC′ → D might not be ´etale are
over μh and over the singular points of Ds (where s, as usual, is the special point of S).
By Abhyankar’s lemma (and the fact that d! ∈ A×), we have tame ramiﬁcation over μh,
so we need only deal with the singular points of Ds. But at the singular points, it follows
from the Lemma of the preceding § that C′ → D extends to an admissible covering, and
C′ = C. ⃝
§3C. Global Moduli
§3.14. Let S be a noetherian scheme. Let f : X → S be a ﬂat, proper morphism. Let
L be a relatively ample line bundle on X. Then we have the following
Lemma: Let φ : F→ G be a morphism of coherent sheaves on X. Suppose that G is ﬂat
over S. Then there exists a unique closed subscheme Z ⊆ S such that for every morphism
T → S,w eh a v e φT =0 (where the subscript denotes the result of base-changing from S
to T ) if and only if the morphism T → S factors through Z.
Proof: By uniqueness, it suﬃces to prove the Lemma Zariski locally on S. Then there
exists an n such that F(n)( w h e r eF(n)= F⊗ OX L⊗n) is generated by global sections.
Thus, it suﬃces to prove the Lemma in the case F = OX.M o r e o v e r , i fn is suﬃciently
large, then f∗OX(n)a n df∗G(n) are vector bundles on S.L e t α : f∗OX(n) → f∗G(n)b e
the morphism of vector bundles induced by twisting, then pushing forward φ.L e t Z be
the zero locus of α.T h e nZ has the property asserted in the statement of the Lemma. ⃝
Corollary: Let F and G be closed subschemes of X, and suppose that F is ﬂat over
S. Then there exists a closed subscheme Z ⊆ S such that for every morphism T → S,w e
have FT ⊆ GT (where the subscripts denote the result of base-changing from S to T )i f
and only if the morphism T → S factors through Z.
Proof: Apply the above Lemma to the morphism J→ O F ,w h e r eG = V (J ). ⃝
§3.15. Suppose now that ( f : C → S, μf ⊆ C)a n d( h : D → S, μh ⊆ D)a r e
symmetrically pointed stable curves. Suppose that we are given anS-morphism π : C → D.
25

Lemma: There exists a unique subscheme Z ⊆ S such that for any morphism T → S,
πT : CT → DT satisﬁes conditions (2), (3), and (4) of the deﬁnition of a log admissible
morphism if and only if T → S factors through Z.
Proof: For ﬁniteness (condition (2)), one notes that there exists a closed set H ⊆ C such
that π restricted to C − H is quasi-ﬁnite, while for x ∈ H, the dimension of π−1π(x)a t x
is nonzero. Then taking Z2 = S − f(H)( w h i c hi so p e ni nS) takes care of condition (2).
Thus, we may assume that π is ﬁnite. Note that it then follows (by the local criterion for
ﬂatness) that π is ﬂat over the smooth locus of h : D → S. Then let us take a collection
of nonintersecting sections ρ1,...,ρ N of h : D → S at whose images h is smooth and such
that every irreducible component of every ﬁber of h has a ρi passing through it (note that
one can always ﬁnd such ρi ´etale locally on S). Then Ki
def
= C ×D,π,ρi S is ﬁnite and
ﬂat over S. Moreover, condition (3) is equivalent to the condition that all the Ki be of
degree d over S. Thus, taking the open subscheme Z3 ⊆ S over which all the Ki have
degree d takes care of condition (3). Finally, we can take care of Condition (4) by means
of Corollary 14 (in the previous §). ⃝
§3.16. Suppose now that ( f : C → S, μf ⊆ C)a n d( h : D → S, μh ⊆ D)a r e
symmetrically pointed stable curves, and that we are given an S-morphism π : C → D
satisfying conditions (2), (3), and (4), of the deﬁnition of a log admissible covering. Now
let us note that the fact that condition (4) is satisﬁed means thatπ automatically extends
uniquely to a log morphism π
log over the smooth locus of h : D → S, for any choice of
log structure on S. Thus, we can consider the morphism dπ : π∗ΩD/S(μh) → ΩC/S (μf )o f
diﬀerentials with logarithmic poles at the marked points. Let us denote byωC/S the relative
dualizing sheaf of C over S. Note that ωC/S (μf ) is naturally isomorphic to Ω Clog/Slog .
Indeed, this follows immediately from computing dualizing sheaves in the universal case
C→
Mg,r. Thus, we have a natural morphism
ΩC/S (μf ) → ΩClog/Slog = ωC/S (μf )
which is an isomorphism outside the singular locus of f : C → S. In other words, if
we denote the zero set of this natural morphism by Csing,t h e nCsing ⊆ C is a closed
subscheme, and C − Csing ⊆ C is precisely the open set of points at which f : C → S is
smooth.
Since the smooth locus of f : C → S is schematically dense in C, it follows that if
there exists a morphism ψ : π∗ωD/S(μh) → ωC/S (μf ) that extends dπ then it is unique.
We shall refer to an isomorphism ψ : π∗ωD/S(μh) → ωC/S(μf ) that extends dπ as a log
extension of dπ.
Lemma: There exists a unique subscheme Z ⊆ S such that for any T → S, dπT admits
a log extension if and only if T → S passes through Z.
26

Proof: Let Z1 ⊆ S be the subscheme such that for any T → S,( π∗ωD/S(μh))|T ∼=
(ωC/S (μf ))|T ⊗OT N (for some line bundle N on T) if and only if T → S factors through
Z1. (See [3], Theorem 7.3, for the existence of such a Z1.) By restricting to Z1,w em a y
assume that π∗ωD/S(μh)a n dωC/S (μf ) are already isomorphic. Letρ: S → C be a section
such that f is smooth at ρ,a n dh is smooth at π ◦ρ. By passing to an open subset of S,
we may assume thatρ∗(dπ) is an isomorphism. Let ψ be that isomorphism of π∗ωD/S(μh)
and ωC/S (μf ) whose restriction to ρ is equal to ρ∗(dπ). The fact that there exists a Z
as asserted in the statement of the Lemma then follows from applying Lemma 14 to the
diﬀerence of the two morphisms π
∗ΩD/S(μh) → ωC/S (μf ) (one obtained from dπ,t h e
other from ψ). ⃝
Suppose that dπ admits a log extension. Then it follows immediately from direct
calculation of ωC/S at a smooth point and at a node that condition (5) of the deﬁnition
of a log admissible morphism is satisﬁed.
§3.17. Before we can continue, we need to make certain observations concerning the
log structure of a symmetrically pointed stable log-curveflog : Clog → Slog. As before, we
denote by MC the ´etale monoid on C deﬁning the log structure of Clog,a n db yNC the
quotient MC/O×
C .L e tν ∈ Csing be a node. Then we make the following
Deﬁnition: We shall call an (unordered) pair of elements (α,β) of Γ(C,N C) a separating
pair at ν if α · β ∈ Γ(S, NS), and, moreover, (´etale locally at ν), there exist sections ˜α, ˜β
of MC such that ˜α (respectively, ˜β) projects to α (respectively, β)i n NC ,a n dm o r e o v e r ,
the images of ˜α and ˜β under the morphism MC →O C (that forms the log structure) map
into and generate the maximal ideal of OCf (ν ),ν.
Note that if (α,β) forms a separating pair, then it follows from the deﬁnitions that both
α and β necessarily belong to ΓC ⊆ NC, at least in a neighborhood of ν.
It is not necessarily the case that a separating pair at ν exists, even ´etale locally on
the base. However, we have the following result:
Proposition: Suppose that removing ν from Cf(ν) breaks Cf(ν) up into two separate
connected components. Then, ´ etale locally on S, there exists a separating pair α,β ∈
Γ(C, ΓC) at ν.
Proof: It suﬃces to prove this in the universal case. Therefore, we may assume that S
is ´etale over Mg,r. In fact, by basic properties of ´etale sheaves, we may even assume that
S is the completion of Mg,r at the point deﬁned by Cf(ν), and that the log structure on
S is that log structure pulled back from the classifying morphism S → Mg,r.T h u s ,MC
injects into OC.I na n´etale neighborhood of ν, there exist elements x, y of mC,ν (i.e., the
maximal ideal of OC,ν)a n d t of mS,f(ν) such that xy = t,a n ds u c ht h a tx, y generate
mCf (ν ),ν . We then deﬁne α as follows: In a neighborhood of ν where x is deﬁned and there
are no nodes other thanν,w el e tα be the element ofNC deﬁned by x ∈ MC ⊆O C.A w a y
from ν, we deﬁne α as follows: Over the connected component where x is not identically
27

zero, we take α to be the trivial section of NC. Over the connected component where x is
identically zero, we take α to be the section of NC deﬁned by t ∈ MC ⊆O C. It is easy to
see that α, deﬁned in this way is well-deﬁned and forms a section of Γ C. We deﬁne β by
reversing the roles of x and y. It is clear that (α,β) then forms a separating pair at ν. ⃝
§3.18. We continue with the notation of the preceding §. So what happens when the
node ν does not satisfy the hypotheses of the preceding Proposition? This happens when
the dual graph of Cf(ν) has a loop. In this case, however, it is easy to see that there exists
a ﬁnite ´etale covering of degree two: φf(ν) : ˜Cf(ν) → Cf(ν) such that
(1) φ−1(ν) consists of two points ν1 and ν2
(2) over Cf(ν) − ν, ˜Cf(ν) consists of two disjoint copies of Cf(ν) − ν.
Moreover, ´etale locally on S, there exists a ﬁnite ´etale covering of degree two φ : ˜C → C
whose restriction to f(ν)i s φf(ν). Let us equip ˜C with the log structure pulled back from
C, and denote the resulting log scheme by ˜Clog.M o r e o v e r , w e l e t Γ˜C = φ∗ΓC.T h e n w e
have the following result:
Proposition: ´Etale locally on S, there exist elements α,β ∈ Γ( ˜C, Γ˜C) that form a
separating pair at both ν1 and ν2.
Proof: The proof is completely analogous to the proof of the Proposition in the preceding
§. ⃝
§3.19. Suppose now that ( f : C → S, μf ⊆ C)a n d( h : D → S, μh ⊆ D)a r e
symmetrically pointed stable curves, and that we are given an S-morphism π : C → D
satisfying conditions (2), (3), (4), and (5) of the deﬁnition of a log admissible covering. Let
Mup
S and Mdn
S be as in §3.10. Let Nup
S = Mup
S /O×
S ;a n dNdn
S = Mdn
S /O×
S .A l s o ,w eh a v e
subsheaves of generators Γup
S ⊆ Nup
S ,a n dΓdn
S ⊆ Ndn
S , as deﬁned in §3.3. Since Γ up
S and
Γdn
S are constructible sheaves of sets on S, it follows that they can be represented ([28], p.
160) by quasi-ﬁnite ´etale algebraic spaces over S; in the following we shall identify these
sheaves with the spaces that represent them. Let Δup
S be the subsheaf of Nup
S obtained by
considering sums of d sections of Γup
S .L e tZ1 → S be the quasi-ﬁnite ´etale algebraic space
over S parametrizing morphisms
Γdn
S → Δ up
S
that preserve the zero section. Note that Z1 need not be a separated S-scheme.
Let us focus attention on a geometric points of S. Let us assume that we are given a
collection γ1,...,γ N ∈ Γ(S,Γdn
S ) such that the morphism of sheaves of sets {1,...,N }→
28

Γdn
S given by mapping i to γi is surjective,a n d N is equal to the number of nodes of
Ds. (One can always ﬁnd such a collection of γi’s by ´etale localization at s.) Thus, over
Z1, we have a tautological morphism Σ : Γ dn
S |Z1 → Δ up
S |Z1 , together with sections γi ∈
Γ(Z1,Γdn
S ) ⊆ Γ(Z1,N dn
S ), and sections γ′
i =Σ (γi) ∈ Γ(Z1,N up
S ). Let Lγi (respectively,
Lγ′
i
) be the line bundle on Z1 corresponding to the O×
Z1 -torsor obtained by considering
liftings of γ (respectively, γ′) to a section ofMdn
S (respectively, Mup
S ). Let Z2 → Z1 be the
space of N-tuples of isomorphisms Lγi
∼= Lγ′
i
over Z1.T h u s ,Z2 is a Gm-torsor over Z1.
Note that if we know that π : C → D is admissible, then we obtained a natural section
of Z2 in the course of constructing the canonical log structure on S. More concretely, in
the notation of §3.10, the morphisms Γdn
S → Δ up
S and Lγi →L γ′
i
are those induced by the
morphism Mdn
S → Mup
S given by log(b) ↦→ ∑e · log(a), where the sum is over all nodes
λ of Cs that map to the node in question ν (i.e., the node for which b is a deformation
parameter) of Ds.
Let Z3 ⊆ Z2 be the closed sub-algebraic space over which the tautological isomor-
phisms Lγi →L γ′
i
are compatible with the exponential morphisms Lγi →O Z2 and
Lγ′
i
→O Z2 of the log structures Mdn
S and Mup
S .L e t Mad →O Z3 be the log struc-
ture on Z3 associated to the largest quotient monoid Q of (Mup
S × Mdn
S )|Z3 such that the
following diagram commutes:
Lγi |Z3 −→ Mdn
S |Z3
(0,id)
−→ (Mup
S × Mdn
S )|Z3 −→ Q
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓id
Lγ′
i
|Z3 −→ Mup
S |Z3
(id,0)
−→ (Mup
S × Mdn
S )|Z3 −→ Q
Thus, we obtain a log algebraic space ( Z3,M ad), together with logarithmic morphisms
(Z3,M ad) → (Z3,M up
S |Z3 ) → MS
log
g,r ,a n d( Z3,M ad) → (Z3,M dn
S |Z3 ) → MS
log
q,s ,w h i c h
thus determine log-curves Clog
Z3 → (Z3,M ad)a n d Dlog
Z3 → (Z3,M ad) (whose underlying
curves are C → S and D → S, pulled back to Z3). Let us denote the monoids deﬁning the
log structures on Clog
Z3 and Dlog
Z3 by MC and MD, respectively. Thus, as usual, we obtain
sheaves NC,Γ C, ND,a n dΓD.
§3.20. We maintain the notation of the preceding §. Let us focus attention on a node
ν of Ds. Let us assume that we have a separating pair ( α,β)a t ν (for the log-curve
Dlog
Z3 → (Z3,M ad)). Also, let us assume that γ
def
= α ·β is equal to the image ofγ1 in Mad.
Let Zν
4 → Z3 be the quasi-ﬁnite ´etale algebraic space of pairs of sections˜α, ˜β of Γd
C |Z3 such
that ˜α · ˜β = α ·β. (Here we use the fact that the push-forward of a constructible sheaf by a
proper morphism is again constructible – see, e.g., [28], p. 223, Theorem 2.1.) Let Lα and
Lβ be the O×
DZ3
-torsors of liftings to sections of GD of α and β, respectively. Similarly,
we have L˜α and L˜β on OCZ3
.L e tZν
5 → Zν
4 be the relative scheme parametrizing pairs of
isomorphisms φ : π∗Lα ∼= L˜α and ψ : π∗Lβ ∼= L˜β that are compatible with the exponential
morphisms of the log structures of Clog and Dlog, and such that the composite morphism
29

f ∗Lγ ∼= π∗(Lα ⊗L β)
φ⊗ψ
−→ L ˜α ⊗L ˜β
∼= f ∗Lγ
(where the two isomorphisms at either end are those induced by the equalities α · β =
γ = ˜α · ˜β) is the identity morphism. Note that if we know that π : C → D is admissible,
then we automatically obtain canonical ˜α, ˜β, φ,a n dψ by considering the morphism oflog
structures (that we get automatically from Proposition 11).
Of course, in general, a separating pair (α,β) might not exist. But just as in Proposi-
tion 18, we can always ﬁnd such a pair by passing to an appropriate double covering ofD.
Then it is easy to see that we can still deﬁne a Zν
5 as above (by working with the double
coverings of C and D). Thus, we obtain Zν
5 ’s for every node ν on Ds.L e t Z6 → Z3 be
the product over Z3 of the various Zν
5 ,a s ν varies over the nodes ofDs. Then we have the
following
Lemma: The morphism π|Z6 : C|Z6 → D|Z6 is an admissible covering.
Proof: Indeed, it suﬃces to check condition (1 ′B) of the deﬁnition of an HM-admissible
covering (§3.9). But this follows immediately from considering local generators (near a
node) of the line bundlesLα, Lβ, L˜α,a n dL˜β above, and writing out what it means to give
morphisms φ and ψ (as in the deﬁnition of Zν
5 ) that are compatible with the exponential
morphisms of the log structures, and whose tensor product φ ⊗ ψ satisﬁes the condition
speciﬁed in the deﬁnition of Zν
5 . ⃝
§3.21. We maintain the notations of the preceding §. Now that we know that π|Z6 is
admissible, we can consider the canonical morphisms Γ dn
S → Δ up
S ; Lγi →L γ′
i
; Lα →L ˜α;
Lβ →L ˜β arising from the logarithmic morphisms obtained over the canonical log structures
of §3.10, 3.11. Let Z7 → Z6 be the open sub-algebraic space on which the canonical
Γdn
S → Δ up
S agrees with the tautological Γ dn
S → Δ up
S given by the deﬁnition of Z1.L e t
Z8 ⊆ Z7 be the closed sub-algebraic space on which the canonical Lγi →L γ′
i
agrees with
the tautological Lγi →L γ′
i
given by the deﬁnition of Z2. Similarly, we let Z9 ⊆ Z8 be
the sub-algebraic space on which the canonical ˜α; ˜β; Lα →L ˜α; Lβ →L ˜β agree with the
tautological ˜α; ˜β; Lα →L ˜α; Lβ →L ˜β given by the deﬁnitions of Zν
4 and Zν
5 .T h u s , i n
summary, we have proven the following:
Lemma: Let T → S be a morphism of schemes. Then πT : CT → DT is admissible if
and only if T → S factors through Z9. Moreover, this factorization of T → S through Z9
is unique. In particular, the algebraic space Z9 is, in fact, separated over S. Finally, if d!
is invertible on S,t h e nZ9 is even a closed subscheme of S.
Proof: Indeed, it suﬃces to prove the ﬁnal statement. This follows by noting that Lemma
13 implies that the morphism Z9 → S is proper. Since it is also a monomorphism, it
30

follows that it is quasi-ﬁnite, hence (by Zariski’s main theorem) ﬁnite. Thus, Z9 is a closed
subscheme of S. ⃝
Note ﬁnally, that Z9 comes equipped with a canonical log structure, i.e., the log structure
associated to the admissible covering π|Z9 .
Remark: In fact, it is not diﬃcult to show (although we will not use this fact) that the
morphism Z9 → S is open (i.e., the image of an open set is open). However, even when d!
is invertible on S, it is not necessarily the case either that Z9 and S coincide as sets, or
that Z9 ↪→ S is an open immersion. Indeed, below (in §3.24), we shall construct examples
(where d!i si n v e r t i b l eo nS) of points of S which are not in Z9, as well as of cases where
the nilpotent ideal deﬁning the closed subscheme Z9 ⊆ S is nonzero.
§3.22. We are now ready to state the main Theorem of this Section:
Theorem: Fix nonnegative integers g,r,q,s,d such that 2g − 2+ r = d(2q − 2+ s) ≥ 1.
Let A be the stack over Z deﬁned as follows: for a scheme S, the objects of A(S) are
admissible coverings π : C → D of degree d from a symmetrically r-pointed stable curve
(f : C → S;μf ⊆ C) of genus g to a symmetrically s-pointed stable curve (h : D → S;μh ⊆
D) of genus q; and the morphisms of A(S) are pairs of S-isomorphisms α : C → C and
β : D → D that stabilize the divisors of marked points such that π◦α = β◦π.T h e n A is a
separated algebraic stack of ﬁnite type over Z.M o r e o v e r ,A is equipped with a canonical log
structure MA →O A, together with a logarithmic morphism (A,M A) → MS
log
q,s (obtained
by mapping (C;D;π) ↦→ D) which is log ´etale (always) and proper over Z[ 1
d! ].
Proof: Indeed, we start with Wlog def
= MS
log
g,r ×Z MS
log
q,s
. We consider the Hilbert stack
H → W (i.e., H → W is a relative scheme) of morphisms from the tautological r-pointed
curve of genus g to the tautological s-pointed curve of genus q. Applying Lemmas 15 and
16, we obtain a sub-algebraic stack S ⊆ H, to which we can apply the constructions of
§3.19. Finally, we have the stack Z9 → S (which was constructed ´etale locally on S, but
which clearly descends back down to the original S by Lemma 21). This gives us our
A. The fact that the morphism ( A,M A) → MS
log
q,s is log ´etale is an exercise in tracing
through the deﬁnitions of the various log structures involved. The assertion on properness
then follows from Lemma 13. ⃝
Remark: Applying the construction of [11], Chapter 1, §4.10, to A, one obtains a coarse
moduli space Ac. Moreover, over Z[ 1
d! ], Ac is a projective scheme : Indeed, let Mc be
the coarse moduli space associated to MSq,s. It is well-known (at least in characteristic
zero – see [23]) that Mc is a normal projective scheme. Then by the above Theorem,
Ac →M c is proper. Also, it is clear (by considering the number of possibilities for an
admissible morphism between two given stable curves) thatAc →M c is quasi-ﬁnite. Thus,
by Zariski’s main theorem, it follows that Ac →M c is ﬁnite. Thus, Ac is a projective
scheme.
31

§3.23. Finally, just as in [19], p. 62, we can make explicit the completion of a local ring
of A.L e tk be an algebraically closed ﬁeld. Let A = W(k), the ring of Witt vectors with
coeﬃcients in k.L e tπ : C → D be an admissible covering over k. Let us denote by [π] ∈
A(k); [C] ∈ MSg,r(k); [D] ∈ MSq,s(k) the correspondingk-valued points of the respective
moduli stacks. Let O[π] (respectively, O[D]) be the completion of the strict henselization
of A (respectively, MSq,s)a t[ π] (respectively, [D]). Suppose that D has exactly N nodes,
which we number from 1 to N. Thus, we have a noncanonical isomorphism
O[D] ∼= A[[t1,...,t N ,s1,...,s 3q−3+s−N ]]
where the t’s and s’s are indeterminates; and ti deﬁnes a universal deformation parameter
for the ith node on D. Suppose that C has ni nodes over the ith node on D,w h i c hw e
label (i,1) through (i, ni). Suppose that the ramiﬁcation index of (either branch of) C
over D at the node (i, j)i s ei,j.T h e n
O[π] ∼= O[D][{ti,j }]/(tei,j
i,j − ti)
where we allow i to run from 1 to N,a n d j to run from 1 to ni. The canonical log
structure at [π] is the log structure associated to the quotient monoid of the free monoid on
the symbols {log(ti,j);log(ti)} (where i and j vary as before) by the equivalence relation
generated by log(ti)= ei,j · log(ti,j). The exponential morphism of the canonical log
structure maps the symbol log(ti,j) to (the image in O[π] of) ti,j and the symbol log(ti)t o
(the image in O[π] of) ti.
This sort of explicit structure result gives us the following:
Corollary: Let As ⊆A be the open substack where the curves C and D of the tau-
tological admissible covering π : C → D are smooth. Then As is smooth over Z and
schematically dense in A.M o r e o v e r ,A is ﬂat over MSq,s ; reduced; and its normalization
N is smooth over Z and ﬂat over MSq,s . Thus, we have a natural inclusion As ↪→N .
Finally, the complement of As in N is a divisor with normal crossings. We shall refer to
these divisors as the divisors at inﬁnity of N .
§3.24. We maintain the notations of the preceding §.I n t h i s §, we would like to
construct examples showing the extent to which (in the notation of Lemma 21) Z9 ̸= S:
Example 1: First, we show how to construct k-valued points of Z9 that are not in S.
Namely, we consider admissible π : C → D such that D has a node ν over which two
distinct indices of ramiﬁcation e and e′ occur (i.e., e ̸= e′). Let λ (respectively, λ′)b e
the point of C where the index of ramiﬁcation e (respectively, e′) occurs. Let us assume
(for simplicity) that ν sits on two distinct irreducible components ID and JD of D.L e t
IC (respectively, JC) be the irreducible component of C containing λ that lies over ID
(respectively, JD). Similarly, we deﬁne I′
C and J′
C for λ′.L e t ˜C be the curve obtained
from C as follows: ˜C is exactly the same as C except at λ and λ′; there we glue IC (at λ)
to J′
C (at λ′)a n dI′
C (at λ′)t o JC (at λ). Then we have a map ˜π : ˜C → D (induced by
32

π) which satisﬁes conditions (2) through (5) of the deﬁnition of a log admissible covering,
but is obviously not admissible. (In fact, if e ≡ e′ (mod p)( w h e r ep = char(k)), then dπ′
even admits a log extension in the sense of §3.16. Of course, e ≡ e′ (mod p) is impossible
if d! ∈ k×.)
Example 2: Let B = k[ϵ]/(ϵ2). Let S = Spec(B); let s ∈ S(k) be the unique point. Let
Dϵ = D ×k S;( μh)ϵ =( μh) ×k S ⊆ Dϵ,w h e r eμh ⊆ D is the divisor of marked points inD.
We would like to consider morphisms πϵ : Cϵ → Dϵ from a symmetrically pointed stable
curve (fϵ : Cϵ;(μf )ϵ ⊆ Cϵ)t o( Dϵ;(μh)ϵ) such that πϵ|s = π;a n dπϵ satisﬁes conditions
(2) through (5) of the deﬁnition of a log admissible morphism. By deformation theory, it
follows that the isomorphism classes of such π
ϵ are in one-to-one correspondence with the
elements of some ﬁnite-dimensional k-vector space V , which can be computed by means of
local computations at the nodes. In fact, it is not diﬃcult to calculate V explicitly. One
thus obtains that
dimk V =
∑
i,j
2(ei,j − 1) +sgn(ei,j − 1)
where i, jrun over alli and j as allowed in§3.23, and sgn(0) = 0; sgn of a positive number
is 1. On the other hand, the subspace ofV corresponding to admissible coverings πϵ is (by
what we did in §3.23) of dimension ∑
i,j sgn(ei,j − 1), i.e., in general, it is much smaller
than all of V . Thus, we see that even at a point of S contained in Z9, the ideal deﬁning
the closed subscheme Z9 is, in general, nonzero.
§3D. Admissible Hurwitz Coverings
§3.25. Let π : C → D be an admissible covering.
Deﬁnition: We shall call π an admissible Hurwitz covering if the genus of D is zero and
π is simply ramiﬁed over the marked points of D.
In this Section, we have been concerned with proving the very general Theorem 22 above.
In the rest of this paper, however, we will be concerned only with Hurwitz coverings (i.e.,
the sorts of coverings parametrized by the Hurwitz stacks of §1) and their degenerations,
so we shall refer to admissible Hurwitz coverings simply as admissible coverings.
§3.26. Remark: In this §, we explain why the proof of Theorem 4, p. 58 of [19] has
a fundamental gap. On p. 60 of [19], it is claimed that (in the notation of [19]) H4 will
represent the functor H
U
k,b. In the notation of our Lemma 21, this essentially amounts to
the assertion that Z9 = S. Indeed, the only diﬀerence between our S and [19]’s H4 is that
H4 includes projective embedding data for C (as described on p. 59 of [19]). On the other
hand, we saw (Examples 1 and 2 of §3.24) that in general, Z9 ̸= S.
33

To put the issue another way, [19] completely neglect the nontrivial issue of showing
that condition (1′B) of the deﬁnition of an HM-admissible covering is “scheme-like,” i.e.,
that given an S-morphism π : C → D satisfying all the conditions for an admissible
covering except (1′B), the set of s ∈ S over which πs : Cs → Ds also satisﬁes (1 ′B)h a s
the natural structure of a subscheme Z of S, and, moreover, that over Z, πZ : CZ → DZ
is an admissible covering. These issues occupy the bulk of our proof of Theorem 22, and
are the main reason for the introduction of log structures. Indeed, the condition that a
function deﬁned only locally in a neighborhood of a node on C have an e
th root (say, ´etale
locally) is in general not a very “scheme-like” condition.
For instance, let S = Spec(k[[t]]); X = Spec(k[[x, t]]), where k is an algebraically
closed ﬁeld of characteristic ̸= 2. We regard X as an S-scheme. Consider the condition
that the function x2 − t2 h a v eas q u a r er o o t´etale locally in a neighborhood of the point
x = 0. This condition is satisﬁed at both the special and the generic points of S. But it is
certainly not satisﬁed over S.
Thus, in order to obtain a nice moduli problem it is necessary to translate this sort
of local condition (i.e., condition (1 ′B)) into a condition which is global on the curve C.
This is precisely what is achieved by the introduction of log structures.
§3.27. Notation: We close by introducing some notation that will be of use in the
rest of this paper. Let b ≥ 4 be an integer. Let R = Z[ 1
b! ]. Relative to the notation
of the present section, we are interested in the case q =0 , s = b. We denote by ROb
(respectively, RSb) the scheme Mq,s ⊗Z R (respectively, stack MSq,s ⊗Z R), which thus
forms a compactiﬁcation of the scheme ROb (respectively, stack RSb)o f §1.3. By simple
combinatorial analysis, one sees that in the genus zero case, in fact, every irreducible
component of a stable curve D of genus zero over an algebraically closed ﬁeld is smooth
and rational and that the graph obtained by taking the irreducible components of D as
vertices and the singular points (which necessarily join two distinct components) as edges
must haveH
1 = 0 (in the sense of singular homology). We shall call this graph the “graph
associated to D.”
It follows from [22] that the complement of ROb (resp. RSb)i n ROb (resp. RSb),
i.e. “the divisor at inﬁnity” of ROb (resp. RSb), is made up of irreducible components
I, where the generic point of I represents a stable curve that consists of two copies of P1
joined at one point with i of the marking points on one component andb − i points on the
other component. In the symmetrized case, the divisors at inﬁnity are thus in one-to-one
correspondence with unordered pairs of natural numbers ( i, j) such that i + j = b, i ≥
2,j ≥ 2. Thus, in the future, we shall speak of the “(i,j)-component” or “(i,j)-divisor”
(at inﬁnity) and so on.
Let d ≥ 2 be an integer. Since we have already ﬁxed q = 0 and s = b, Theorem 22
gives us an algebraic stack A.L e t A
R = A⊗ Z R. Note that by Abhyankar’s Lemma,
there is an open and closed substack CSb,d of AR parametrizing the admissible Hurwitz
coverings. Thus, CSb,d contains HRSb,d as a dense open substack (Corollary 23). By §2.9,
it thus follows that CSb,d is geometrically irreducible over R.L e t COb,d →C S b,d be the
ﬁnite ´etale covering of degree b! obtained by ordering the marked points of the curve of
34

genus 0 downstairs (i.e., the “ D”o f π : C → D). Let NS b,d (respectively, NO b,d)b et h e
normalization of CSb,d (respectively, COb,d). Finally, note that we have a commutative
diagram
NO b,d −→ N S b,d −→ Mg
⏐⏐↓ (∗)
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓id
COb,d −→ C S b,d −→ Mg
where the horizontal morphisms on the right assign to an admissible covering π : C → D
the curve C,a n dt h es q u a r e(∗) is Cartesian.
§3.28. Remark : The compactiﬁcation of the Hurwitz scheme has many interesting
applications to the geometry of Mg. For instance, as in [27] (the Appendix to [19]), one
sees that it allows a direct algebraic proof of the connectedness ofMg. One may also note
that the proof of the properness of the compactiﬁcation COb,d never uses the Semi-Stable
Reduction Theorem. Thus it follows that (at least for high characteristic) we obtain a
new, direct, elementary proof of this Theorem.
§4. Construction of the Boundary Components
§4.1. We shall refer to the irreducible components of the complement of HRS
b,d in
CSb,d (respectively, NS b,d) as the “divisors at inﬁnity” of CSb,d (respectively, NS b,d). In
this Section, we shall give an explicit construction as well as a complete combinatorial
description of the “divisors at inﬁnity” of CS
b,d. (One can then classify the divisors at
inﬁnity of COb,d according to which divisor at inﬁnity of CSb,d they are mapped to; un-
fortunately, however, it is not clear that the irreducibility results for divisors at inﬁnity of
CS
b,d extend to the divisors at inﬁnity of COb,d.)
§4.2. Let S be an R-scheme. Let Xi → S, i =1 ,2b e prestable curves in the sense of
[22], i.e., they are ﬂat and proper and have geometric ﬁbres that are reduced, of dimenion
one, and have at most ordinary double points as singularities. Letτ
i : S → Xi be a section
that lands in the smooth locus. By loc. cit , Theorem 3.4, p. 181, we can glue together
the Xi’s along the τi’s to obtain a new prestable curve X → S. It is clear that this
construction is functorial, so if (Yi,ρ i) satisfy the same hypotheses as the ( Xi,τ i), then
we obtain, by clutching, a new prestable curve Y → S as well as a morphism X → Y for
every pair of morphisms Xi → Yi, (i =1 ,2) that carry τi to ρi. It thus follows that if we
also give sections σ(i)
1 ,...,σ (i)
bi
(i =1 ,2) : S → Yi that land in the smooth locus and are
disjoint from each other and from ρi, in such a way that (Yi,σ (i)
1 ,...,σ (i)
bi
,ρi), (i =1 ,2)
is a (bi + 1)-pointed stable curve, and if the morphisms Xi → Yi satisfy all the conditions
for an admissible covering of degree d over (Yi,σ (i)
1 ,...,σ (i)
bi
,ρi) except that:
35

(1) the ramiﬁcation of Xi → Yi over ρi might not be simple; however, it is
tame, and, moreover, we give sectionsτ(i)
1 ,...,τ (i)
l , (i =1 ,2) : S → Xi
that land in the smooth locus, are disjoint from each other, map via
Xi → Yi to ρi (i =1 ,2), and are such that over each geometric point s
of S, τ(i)
1,s;... ;τ(i)
l,s are exactly the points of Xi,s which are in the inverse
image of ρi,s under Xi,s → Yi,s; moreover, the ramiﬁcation index of
Xi,s → Yi,s at τ(i)
j,s (for all j) is independent of i (for i =1 ,2);
(2) the ﬁbres of Xi → S might not be geometrically connected, but if we
glue together X1 and X2 along τ(1)
j and τ(2)
j (for all j), the resulting
X → S has geometrically connected ﬁbres;
then we may construct an admissible covering by taking for X the gluing together of X1
and X2 along τ(1)
j and τ(2)
j (for all j) and for Y , the gluing together of Y1 and Y2 along
ρ1 and ρ2, and for the map X → Y , the functorially associated map for the pair of maps
X1 → Y1 and X2 → Y2. In particular, note that Y is necessarily stable.
Note that instead of gluing together two “almost admissible” coverings to obtain an
admissible covering, we could just as well have glued together more than two “almost
admissible” coverings (with the appropriate conditions analogous to those above on the
data) to obtain an admissible covering. However, we shall have no need for this (only
clerically) more diﬃcult version of the above construction in this paper.
§4.3. Lemma : Let S be an excellent Noetherian R-scheme. Let V → S be smooth
of dimension 1 with section ρ: S → V .L e t U → S be smooth of dimension 1 with a ﬁnite,
ﬂat S-morphism ϕ : U → V which is ´etale except over ρ where it has tame ramiﬁcation.
Let W = the scheme ϕ
−1S = U ×V S,w h e r eS is a V -scheme via ρ.T h e n i fS is regular,
Wred is ﬁnite ´etale over S.
Proof: Using the excellence hypothesis (to ensure that taking “red” commutes with pass-
ing to completion – see EGA IV for a deﬁnition and basic facts about excellent rings), we
reduce immediately to the case where S = Spec A,w h e r eA is a complete local ring with
separably closed residue ﬁeld. Let s be the closed point ofS.T h e n l e tV
∧ =t h ec o m p l e t i o n
of V at the prime ρ(s). Let U ∧ = U ×V V ∧.N o wV ∧ = Spec A[[T]], where T is an inde-
terminate such that the image subscheme of ρ has ideal generated by T. By Abhyankar’s
lemma, U ∧ is the spectrum of a direct product of rings of the form (A[[T]])[X]/(Xn − T)
where n is prime to char k(s). The result follows. ⃝
§4.4. Deﬁnitions : As in §1,w eﬁ x b, d, g. We deﬁne a layout L to be the following
set of data:
(1) An ordered pair of integers (iL,iR) with iL,iR ≥ 2, iL + iR = b (here
L stands for “left”, R for “right”);
(2) Two ordered chains CL and CR of iL (resp. iR) transpositions in Sd
such that if we denote by ∏CL (resp. ∏ CR) the ordered product of the
36

respective transpositions, then we have ∏CL = ∏CR;a n ds u c ht h a t
the subgroup of Sd generated by all the transpositions of CL and CR
acts transitively on {1,...,d }.
When we need to deal with several layouts at once, we shall use notation like iL
L,C L
L ,
etc. to denote the various objects associated to the layout L.L e t D1
L,...,D nL
L (resp.
D1
R,...,D nR
R ) be the domains of transitivity (including those with only one element) of
the group of permutations generated by the transpositions of CL (resp. CR). We refer
to these as the left (resp. right) domains of transitivity . The permutation ∏CL = ∏ CR
will be called the total clutching permutation σ. The ordering of CL gives us a natural
bijection of {1,...,i L} (resp. {1,...,i R})w i t hCL (resp. CR). Relative to this bijection,
let Bi
L (resp. Bi
R), where i =1 ,...,n L (resp. i =1 ,...,n R) be the subset of {1,...,i L}
(resp. {1,...,i R}) corresponding to those transpositions that act nontrivially on Di
L.L e t
bi
L (resp. bi
R) = the cardinality of Bi
L (resp. Bi
R). We call bi
L (resp. bi
R)t h e ith left (resp.
right) partition number of the layout. The permutation which is the ordered product of
all the transpositions of CL (resp. CR) that correspond to elements of Bi
L (resp. Bi
R)
will be called the ith left (resp. right) clutching permutation σi
L (resp. σi
R) and will also
be written ∏
Di
L
CL (resp. ∏
Di
R
CR). Note that the total clutching permutation σ is the
product of the σi
L (resp. σi
R)o v e ri =1 ,...,n L (resp. i =1 ,...n R). Two layouts will be
said to be isomorphic if one can be obtained from the other by switching left and right
and/ or by conjugating all the data by a some element of Sd. It is clear that isomorphism
is an equivalence relation. We denote the (ﬁnite) set of layouts by Lb,d (or simply L when
b, d are ﬁxed and clear) and the set of isomorphism classes of layouts by CLb,d (or simply
CL).
Given a layout L, we deﬁne its template T to be the following set of data:
(1) The ordered pair (iL,iR);
(2) The (unordered) set of “left” (resp. “right”) triples of the following sort:
Each “left” (resp. “right”) triple consists of a left (resp. right) domain
of transitivity, its associated clutching permutation, and its associated
partition number.
Let T
b,d (or simply T) be the set of templates T corresponding to all possible layouts
L. Note that we have an analogous notion of isomorphism of templates , corresponding
to switching left and right and/ or conjugating by a permutation. Let CTb,d (or simply
CT) be the set of isomorphism classes of templates. Then we have the following natural
surjections:
Φ: L −→ T
Ψ: CL −→ CT
§4.5. Theorem : The divisors at inﬁnity of CSb,d are in natural one-to-one corre-
spondence with the elements of CT.
37

Proof: The proof will consist of several steps:
Step A: Construction of divisors at inﬁnity:
Let T∈ Tb,d be a template. We start by constructing the “ left iL-point stack”. (Of
course, the construction of the right iR-point stack is entirely analogous.) Let LROT =
RO(iL+1),w h e r eL stands for “left”, RO for “rigidiﬁed, ordered” (as usual), andT denotes
the dependence on the template. Let b1,...,b nL be the left partition numbers (in any
order!) of the template T . Let us partition the set {1,...,i L} into disjoint subsets Ai
(where i =1 ,...,n L)o f bi elements. The sections of P1 ×L R OT corresponding to the
set Ai will be called sections of the ith partition. The last section will be called the
clutching section.L e t πi : LROT →D R O bi+1 denote the map corresponding to sending
the sections of the ith left partition (in some order) to the marking sections of DRObi+1
and the clutching section to the clutching section (recall the terminology from §1). Now
G = Sb1 ×S b2 × ... ×S bnL generically acts freely on LROT by allowing the ith factor to
act naturally on the sections of theith partition. We deﬁne the left iL-point stack, LRST ,
to be the quotient (in the sense of stacks) of LROT by G, which is generically a scheme
(by the generic freeness of the section ofG). Note that the πi’s induce natural projections
ϕi : LRST →D R S bi+1.
Now let σi ∈S d be the ith left clutching permutation. Let Di be the ith left do-
main of transitivity, and let di = the cardinality of Di. Then we constructed ( §1.4,1.5)
DHRSσi
bi+1,di
and a “pseudo-universal” covering:
Ci
βi
−→ P1
Di ⊇ DDi ⊇ MDi ,C Di
αi ↘
⏐⏐↓
Di
where CDi
∼= Di,a n dw ew r i t eDi for DHRSσi
bi+1,di
. Recall that CDi is the clutching
section, while MDi (which is ﬁnite ´etale of rank bi over Di) is the marking divisor. Since
Di is regular, it follows by Lemma 3 that the reduced inverse image via βi of CDi is ´etale
over CDi
∼= Di; let us denote this reduced inverse image by C∼
Di . Now the question arises:
is C∼
Di “geometric” over R in the sense that the ´etale covering C∼
Di → CDi does not factor
through a covering obtained by tensoring up by an ´etale cover R∼ of R? I claim that the
answer is “yes”. Indeed, recall from Proposition 10 of §2 that the connected components
over R correspond naturally to the various ramiﬁcation indices, and these components are,
in fact, geometric over R.
We are now in a position to construct the left degenerate Hurwitz stack associated
to the template T , which we we shall call LDHT . We deﬁne LDHT to be the ﬁbred
product over LRST of the pull-backs via the ϕi of the arrow Di →D R S bi+1.I ti s c l e a r
by the results of §2t h a tLDHT is smooth and geometrically irreducible over R.W e c a n
also pull-back the coverings C∼
Di →D i to coverings C∧
Di →L D H T . These coverings are
´etale and “geometric” in the sense used above. Therefore, by basic facts of Galois the-
ory, there exists a (noncanonical) ﬁnite ´etale Galois covering Λ →L D H T that dominates
38

all the connected components of all the C∼
Di (for all i)a n dw h i c hi sgeometrically irre-
ducible over R. We denote the pull-backs of the objects Ci,αi,βi,M Di ,C Di ,C ∼
Di ,D Di by
CΛ
i ,γi,δi,M Λ
i ,C Λ
i ,C ∼,Λ
i ,D Λ
i . We thus obtain a commutative diagram:
C∼,Λ
i ⊆C Λ
i
δi
−→ P1
Λ ⊇ DΛ
i ⊇ MΛ
i ,C Λ
i ∼= Λ
γi ↘
⏐⏐↓
Λ
(Diagram 4.1)
where the relative dimension of Λ is iL − 2. Note that C∼,Λ
i → Λi s split (i.e., every
connected component of C∼,Λ
i maps isomorphically to Λ).
Analogously, we construct the right degenerate Hurwitz stackRDHT and, in place of
Λ, we have P (the capital Greek letter “rho”). We thus obtain a diagram:
C∼,P
i ⊆C P
i
ϵi
−→ P1
P ⊇ DP
i ⊇ MP
i ,C P
i ∼= P
ζi ↘
⏐⏐↓
P
(Diagram 4.2)
where (again) the relative dimension of P over R is iR − 2. Thus K
def
=Λ ×R P has relative
dimension over R equal to b − 4. This is just the right dimension for a divisor of CSb,d.
Let us pull the Diagrams 4.1 and 4.2 back to K via the projections to Λ and P,a n d
denote the objects so obtained by C∼,Λ
i,K ; CΛ
i,K ; etc. Now we ﬁrst glue the left and right
copies of P1 together along CΛ
i and CP
i ; using the marking divisors MΛ
i and MP
i we thus
obtain a b-pointed stable curve B →K . Let us next note that (referring to §4.4) the
irreducible components of CΛ
i (resp. CP
i ) correspond naturally to the left (respectively,
right) domains of transitivity, which is part of the information of the layout that is pre-
served in the template. Thus, there is a natural isomorphism C
Λ
i ∼= CP
i . Let us glue
together ∐
i=1,...,nL
CΛ
i,K and ∐
i=1,...,nR
CP
i,K (both prestable curves) along CΛ
i and CP
i via
this isomorphism and call the resulting curveX →K . It follows from the conditions in the
deﬁnition of a layout and by what we did in §4.2, that we then obtain an admissible cov-
ering f : X → B over K. By the modular deﬁnition of CSb,d, we then obtain a morphism
K→C S b,d which we call M T . It is clear by composition with the morphism CSb,d → RSb
that M T is quasi-ﬁnite. Thus, for dimensional reasons, the closure of its image must be
an irreducible divisor of CSb,d, which is ﬂat over R. We shall refer to this divisor as the
divisor DT associated to T . We shall also refer to any divisor of NS b,d that lies above
DT as a “divisor associated to T ”. Finally, it is clear that isomorphic templates deﬁne the
same divisor. Thus we obtain a map:
Ω: CT −→ { divisors at infinity of CSb,d}
39

Step B: Surjectivity of Ω:
Since CSb,d → RSb is ﬂat (Corollary 23 of §3), every divisor at inﬁnity of CSb,d lies
above a divisor at inﬁnity of RSb,d, whose generic element is necessarily of the form given
in Diagram 3.1. Thus it suﬃces to see that every geometric point of CSb,d such that the
stable curve downstairs is of the form given in Diagram 3.1 (in the future, we shall call
such a covering abasic admissible covering of type(i, j), where (i, j)i sa si n loc. cit.)i si n
the image of a geometric point of one theM
T ’s. But this is obvious from the construction.
Step C: Injectivity of Ω:
It suﬃces to see that given any basic admissible covering, we can recover the informa-
tion contained in a template from the purely geometric data of the covering. But this is
clear, for left (resp. right) domains of transitivity correspond to the irreducible components
on the left (resp. right) hand side of the curve upstairs, associated clutching permutation
correspond to the ramiﬁcation data at clutching points, and partition numbers correspond
to the number simple ramiﬁcation points of each irreducible component upstairs. ⃝
§4.6. Any particular divisor at inﬁnity of CS
b,d will be called a Species.I f ( iL,iR)
is the ﬁrst piece of data of a template T (see §4.4), then we call T a “template of type
(iL,iR)”. We also say that the corresponding Species is of type ( iL,iR). Before going
on, it is worthwhile to enumerate the various Species of type ( b − 2,2). By the previous
Theorem, this amounts to classifying explicitly the various templates that appear for basic
admissible coverings of type (b − 2,2).
(b-2)   points
x      x
2     points
x  x  x  x  x  .........  x  x  x  x
Let C be a component on the right hand side of the curve upstairs for such a covering.
Then either:
I. C has no “x”’s (i.e., simple ramiﬁcation points); then C maps isomor-
phically to the copy of P1 downstairs;
II. C has exactly one “x”; then it is clear that C ∼= P1 and the map
downstairs must be the “squaring map”; there is one clutching point on
C, where the ramiﬁcation index is two; or
III. C has exactly two “x”’s; then each of those corresponds to a transpo-
sition; up to renaming elements, these two transpositions are either:
(A) (12),(23): then C ∼= P
1; there is one clutching point
on C with ramiﬁcation index three; the map down-
stairs is some uniquely determined map;
40

(B) (12),(12): then C ∼= P1; there is no ramiﬁcation at
the clutching points, of which there are two onC;t h e
map downstairs is the “squaring map”;
(C) (12),(34): the degree of the map from C to the copy
of P1 downstairs would have to be four, and the de-
gree of the total ramiﬁcation divisor on C would also
have to be four; thus this case is impossible by the
Riemann-Hurwitz formula.
Let us now consider the totality of components on the right. Exactly one of the following
two possibilities must hold:
(1) There are two components on the right with one “x” each and all the other components
have no “x”’s. In this case, let us consider the associated graph of the curve upstairs.
On the right, we have d − 2 vertices, each with exactly one edge protruding from it. It
follows that if the graph is to be connected (which it must be), then there can only be one
irreducible component on the left. This component is a smooth component of genusg (the
original genus) and has d − 2 clutching points, one going to each irreducible component
on the right. Of these, there is ramiﬁcation of degree 2 at two clutching points (which
we shall call points of degenerate ramiﬁcation), and no ramiﬁcation at any of the d − 4
others. It is thus clear that in this case, the template is uniquely determined. We call
the corresponding divisor at inﬁnity the divisor of Species 2. A typical basic admissible
covering of this Species is shown in the Pictorial Appendix.
(2) There is exactly one component on the right with two “x”’s, and all the other components
have no “x”’s. Then the component with two “x”’s is as in exactly one of the following,
corresponding, respectively, to the Cases (A) and (B) of the preceding III:
(A) It is clear that the graph of the curve upstairs is the same in in (1) above.
Thus there is only one irreducible component on the left; it is smooth
of genus g and has d − 2 clutching points, one going to each irreducible
component on the right. Of these, there is ramiﬁcation of degree 3 at one
clutching point (which we shall call thepoint of degenerate ramiﬁcation)
and no ramiﬁcation at any of thed−3 others. It is thus clear that in this
case, the template is uniquely determined. We call the corresponding
divisor at inﬁnity the divisor of Species 1. A typical basic admissible
covering of this Species is shown in the Pictorial Appendix.
(B) Let us consider the graph associated the curve upstairs. On the right,
we have d − 1 vertices; from d − 2 of them, there protrudes exactly one
edge; from the other one of them there protrude exactly two edges. Now
either those two edges end up at the same vertex on the left, or they
end up at diﬀerent vertices. We thus examine each of these two cases:
41

α ) The Same Vertex: Then there is only one vertex
on the left. This corresponds to a smooth, irreducible
component of genusg − 1, since the loop on the graph
contributes “one” to the arithmetic genus of the curve
upstairs. There are exactly d clutching points on this
component on the left, all of which are unramiﬁed.
Of these d − 2 connect to components on the right
of type (I) in our classiﬁcation above of components
of the curve upstairs, and the other 2 (which we shall
points of degenerate ramiﬁcation) connect to the com-
ponent of type (III) (B) in that classiﬁcation. Clearly
the template is thus uniquely determined. We call the
corresponding divisor at inﬁnity the divisor of Species
3A. A typical basic admissible covering of this Species
is shown in the Pictorial Appendix.
β ) Diﬀerent Vertices: Then it is clear that these are
the only two vertices on the left. They correspond
to two smooth, irreducible components C
1 and C2.
Let gi be the genus of Ci (where i =1 ,2). If bi =
the number of “x”’s on Ci,a n ddi is the degree of Ci
over the left hand copy of P1,t h e nw eh a v e ,b yt h e
Hurwitz formula, 2 (gi − 1) + 2di = bi, g1 + g2 = g,
b1 + b2 = b − 2, d1 + d2 = d. The map downstairs
Ci → P1 thus has only simple ramiﬁcation. The
clutching points are all unramiﬁed with one clutch-
ing point on each C
i (which we shall refer to as a
point of degenerate ramiﬁcation)going to the compo-
nent of type (III) (B); the otherdi −1 clutching points
on each Ci go to components of type (I). Given pairs
of integers (b1,b2), (d1,d2) such that b1 + b2 = b − 2,
d1 +d2 = d,w i t hbi ≥ 0,d i ≥ 1 and such that thegi’s
computed via the Hurwitz formula are nonnegative in-
tegers (for i =1 ,2) will always appear, and once the
b
i’s anddi’s are given, the template is clearly uniquely
determined. The corresponding divisor at inﬁnity will
be call the divisor of Species 3B (b
1,b2); ( d1,d2). It
will turn out that the case when b1 = b − 2,b 2 =
0,d 1 = d − 1,d 2 =1( ⇒ g1 = g, g 2 = 0) will be es-
pecially important; we shall call this case the divisor
of Species 3B∗. As usual, illustrations are shown in
the Pictorial Appendix.
§4.7. Let us note that among the templates of type (b − 2,2), the Species that do not
42

map via the map CSb,d → Mg of §3.27, into the boundary at inﬁnity of Mg are exactly
Species 1, 2, and 3B (b1,b2); (d1,d2)w h e ng1 = g, g2 = 0. Among these, it turns out that
the divisors of Species 1, 2, and 3 B∗ (which constitutes a set of precisely three divisors)
will play an important role in the future. We shall refer to these three divisors as the
excess divisors.
§4.8. If F is a ring andE is a set, we shall denote byF[E] the freeF-module generated
by elements of E. By Theorem 5, to every element of the set CT, one can naturally
associate a divisor, hence a divisor class of CSb,d, i.e., an element of Cl(CSb,d). We thus
obtain a map:
Σ: Z[CT] −→ Cl(CSb,d)
Later we shall show the following
Theorem: If d> 2g +4 , g ≥ 5, then the group Cl(CSb,d) is of ﬁnite type over Z,a n d
Σ is a surjection when tensored with Q.
Clearly it suﬃces to show that Pic(HRSb,d) is ﬁnite. We shall complete the proof in §6.7.
Appendix to §4
§4.9. In SGA 7, one ﬁnds an exposition of the theory of vanishing cycles for ordinary
(i.e., 0-pointed) stable curves. Although the theory of vanishing cycles for arbitrary b-
pointed stable curves is also implicit in SGA, we review it here explicitly for the sake of
clarity. In the case of b-pointed stable curves of genus zero, which is the principal case of
interest here, one can often describe the monodromy action much more explicitly than in
the 0-pointed higher genus case since the fundamental group involved is a free group.
§4.10. Let (A,m) be a strictly henselian discrete valuation ring, S = Spec A.L e t
{C
f
−→ S;σ1,...,σ b : S → C} be a b-pointed stable curve overS.L e tU = C − ⋃b
i=1 σi(S).
We use the notation Uη,Uη,Us, as usual. Then we have the following
Proposition : There is a natural, surjective morphism of specialization:
πt
1(Uη,ρη)′ −→ πt
1(Us,ρs)′
where ρ : S → U is a section of f ,a n d“ t” means the tame fundamental group, and the
“prime” next to the fundamental group indicates that we are only concerned with the part
of the fundamental dealing with coverings of degree prime to the residue characteristic of
A.
43

Remark: It has been pointed out by the referee that this result has already been proven
by Grothendieck in [5].
Proof: Write j : U → C for the natural inclusion. Let G = a ﬁnite group of order prime
to the residue characteristic of A. By [29], Expos´e XIII, Theorem 2.4, p. 380, we have
R1
´etjs ∗GUs
∼= (R1
´etj∗GU )|Cs . By the Leray spectral sequence and the proper base change
theorem, we thus see that πt
1(Us,ρs) ∼= πt
1(U, ρs) ∼= πt
1(U, ρη). The rest of the Proposition
then follows trivially. ⃝
§4.11. Let us now assume that C is obtained in the following fashion. We are given
a collection of generically distinct sections σ′
1,...σ ′
b : S → P1
S such that σ′
1(S) intersects
σ′
2(S), but all the other intersections among pairs of σ′
i are empty. Then C is obtained by
blowing up P1
S at the schematic intersection of σ′
1(S)a n dσ′
2(S); we thus obtain a stable
curve {C
f
−→ S;σ1,...,σ b} where theσi are induced by theσ′
i. Now if we ﬁx a base sectionρ
(that doesn’t intersect any of theσi), and assume (for simplicity) that we are working over
C,t h e nπan
1 (Uη,ρη) may be described as being generated by paths γ1,...γ b around the
various σi,η with the sole relation thatγ1γ2 ...γ b = 1, i.e., a free group onb − 1 generators.
On the other hand,πan
1 (Us) may be described as being generated by pathsδ1,...,δ b around
the various σi,s with the sole relations δ1δ2 =1 , δ3δ4 ...δ b = 1. An illustration of this
degeneration situation is given in the Pictorial Appendix. The morphism of specialization
is given by γ
i ↦→ δi, so the “vanishing cycle” is clearly γ1γ2 =( γ3γ4 ...γ b)−1.
Pictorial Appendix
Species 1:
   P1
   P1
(b-2)   points
x      x
2     points
genus
g
Ramification
        index:
1
1
3
point of
degenerate
ramification
one   copy
         of
(d-3)  copies
            of
Left Right
x     x
x  x  x  x  x  .........  x  x  x  x
x  x  ......  x  x
(b-2)  points
44

Species 2:
   P1
   P1
(b-2)   points
x      x
2     points
genus
g
Ramification
        index:
1
1
         of
            of
Left Right
 (d-4)   copies
two    copies
2
2
x
x
x  x  x  x  x  .........  x  x  x  x
x  x  .......  x  x
(b-2)  points
Species 3A:
   P1
   P1
(b-2)   points
x      x
2     points
genus
Ramification
        index:
1
1
         of
            of
Left Right
1
1
 (d-2)   copies
one     copy
g-1
x       x
x  x  x  x  x  .........  x  x  x  x
x  x  .....  x  x
(b-2)  points
45

Species 3B (b1,b2); (d1,d2):
(b-2)   points
x      x
2     points
Left Right
b    points1
b    points2
genus   g
genus   g1
2
 (d  -1)   copies
              of
P 1
 (d  -1)   copies
              of
P
1
1
2
Ramification
      index:
1
1
1
1
1
1
x  x  .......  x
x  x  .......  x
x  x  x  x  x  .........  x  x  x  x
x            x
Species 3B∗:
P 1
(b-2)   points
x      x
2     points
Left Right
genus   g
Ramification
      index:
1
1
1
1
              of
  (d-2)   copies
P 1
        one  copy
              of
P 1
(b-2)  points
points of
degenerate
ramification
1
x  x  .......  x
x  x  x  x  x  .........  x  x  x  x
x              x
46

Degeneration Situation with Vanishing Cycle:
xγ
γ
 1
 2
γ   γ12
vanishing   cycle
 x
x
γ b
 3γ
 x
x
 b
 3
δ
δ
 x
δ
δ
 2
 1
x
degeneration
x
P 1
P 1
P 1
§5. Cohomology Calculations
§5.1. In this Section, we compute the various cohomology groups of a number of
universal objects, in preparation for the construction of the “main ﬁbration” in the next
Section. At ﬁrst, we shall work over C, so that we can use a number of analytic results;
at the end of the Section, we shall extend the results to the arithmetic situation over Z.
Thus, unless we specify otherwise, all objects are taken to be over the complex numbers
C.
Often in this Section, we shall use the language of torsors over a group; for the reader
unfamiliar with this language, we suggest [15] as a place to start.
§5.2. Let M
g = the moduli stack of smooth curves of genus g with g ≥ 5. Let
f : C→M g be the universal curve of genus g.L e t P = Pic (C/Mg) be the Picard
stack, a smooth algebraic group stack over Mg, which doesn’t necessarily represent the
Picard functor Pic (since f doesn’t admit a section), but is, instead, its´etale sheaﬁﬁcation
(see, e.g., [12] for a detailed discussion of the Picard functor); thus we have a morphism
Pic →P .L e t J = Picτ (C/Mg)
ϕ
−→ Mg be the open subgroup which is the universal
47

Jacobian. Let E = P/J be the quotient ´etale group stack, with geometric ﬁbres over Mg
isomorphic Z. Thus we have the following situation:
Pic
⏐⏐↓
J− → P − → E
ϕ ↘
⏐⏐↓ ↙
C
f
−→ M g
Now from the existence of the global bundle ω =Ω 1
C/Mg
on C, or by the existence of the
degree map, one sees that E ∼= Mg × Z.T h u sP splits into connected components J d,
with d ∈ Z, according to the degree. Each J d is thus J -torsor in the ´etale topology over
Mg, i.e., an element ηd ∈ H1
´et(Mg, J ). From the fact that P is a group stack, we see that
ηd = dη1. From the existence of ω, we see that 2(g − 1)η1 =0 . L e tχ =2 (g − 1). Then if
we “change groups” for the torsor J d via the homomorphism [χ]: J→ J multiplication
by χ, we obtain a new J -torsor J ∼,d, which is clearly trivial. Moreover, by the Leray
spectral sequence, we see that Hi
an(J d,A) ∼= Hi
an(J ∼,d,A) ∼= Hi
an(J ,A) (where “an”
denotes the analytic topology) for any ring A in which χ is invertible.
§5.3. We recall the following results of [16] and [1]:
(A) Pic Mg ∼= H2
an(Mg,Z) ∼= Z, where the ﬁrst isomorphism is the ﬁrst
Chern class map, and Pic Mg is generated by the Hodge bundle λ.
(B) Pic C ∼= H2
an(C,Z) ∼= Z2, where the ﬁrst isomorphism is the ﬁrst Chern
class map, and Pic C is generated by λ and ω.
(C) Let F = R1
anf∗Z ∼= R1
anϕ∗Z.T h e nH1
an(Mg, F) vanishes. (In fact, in
[16], Harer makes the stronger assertion than in fact the ﬁrst homology
group of F vanishes; later in a correction (whose existence is mentioned
in [17], Chapter 7) he retracts this and asserts only that the ﬁrst ho-
mology group of F is torsion; but this implies that the ﬁrst cohomology
group must vanish.)
(D) Pic (C×
Mg C× ... ×C ) is ﬁnitely generated for any number of factors
of C. (In fact, the result in [1] is stated only for the moduli stack of
b-pointed stable curves of genus g; but one deduces (D) easily from this
fact using elementary properties of the Picard group.)
48

Recall that F is a locally constant sheaf of free Z-modules of rank 2g on Mg.M o r e o v e r ,
F is endowed with a natural symplectic form E (“the intersection pairing”).
Lemma : H0
an(Mg,R2
anϕ∗Z) ∼= Z and is generated by the element corresponding to E
under the isomorphism R2
anϕ∗Z ∼= ∧2F.
Proof: Since E is not a multiple of any other form, it suﬃces to prove the result after
tensoring with Q.I f M is the Γ-module (where Γ =πan
1 (Mg)) corresponding to F⊗ Z Q,
then since ∧2
Q ⊆ M ⊗Q M ∼= HomQ(M,M ) (where the last isomorphism of Γ-modules
follows from the fact that via E, M is a self-dual Γ-module), it suﬃces to show that M
is an irreducible Γ-module. But this action factors through the surjection [8], p. 107,
Γ → Sp(2g, Z), and one sees from looking at well-known sets of generators that Sp(2g, Z)
is Zariski dense in Sp(2g, Q). Moreover, it is obvious that M is irreducible under the
action of Sp(2g, Q). The Lemma follows. ⃝
§5.4. Proposition : There exists an isomorphism A : J
∼
→J ∧ (i.e., the dual abelian
stack to J ) whose corresponding alternating form is E.
Proof: This, in fact, holds over Z, so for the remainder of §5.4, we work over Z,n o tC.
The Proposition is well-known when there exists a section ofC.T h u s ,l e tK = the quotient
ﬁeld of Mg;l e t L be a ﬁnite Galois extension of K such that CL admits a section. We
thus obtain an isomorphism JL
∼
→J ∧
L with the desired property. Since E is deﬁned over
K, this isomorphism descends to JK
∼
→J ∧
K. By [11], Remark 1.10 a), p.7, the isomorphism
extends over Mg. ⃝
Corollary : There exists a line bundle on J whose relative ﬁrst Chern class (with
respect to ϕ)i s 2E.
Proof: Pull-back the Poincar´e bundle on J× Mg J ∧ via (1, A): J→ J× Mg J ∧. ⃝
§5.5. Proposition : The ﬁrst Chern class induces a surjection c1 : Pic (J d) →
H2
an(J ,Z) and we have an exact sequence:
0 −→ Pic (Mg) ⊗Z Q −→ c1(Pic(J d)) ⊗Z Q −→ QE −→ 0
where the injection is the pull-back via J d →M g and the surjection is the relative ﬁrst
Chern class with respect ϕ.
Proof: Clear from the preceding paragraphs. At ﬁrst it may appear that c1 is only
surjective up to torsion, but it follows from the Kummer and exponential exact sequences
that the cokernel of c
1 is always torsion-free. ⃝
§5.6. Let C∼,d = C× Mg J d.W r i t eψd : C∼,d →J d. Denote by κα ∈ H2
´et(J d,Gm)t h e
obstruction to the existence of a universal bundle of degree d on C∼,d.W r i t eid : J d →P
for the natural inclusion. From the Leray spectral sequence of ψd for the ´etale sheaf Gm,
we get an exact sequence:
49

Pic(J d)
⏐⏐↓natural identification
H1
´et(C∼,d,Gm) −→ H0
´et(J d,R1
´etψd,∗Gm)
γ
−→ H2
´et(J d,Gm)
By general nonsense, κd = γ(id). From the existence of ω on C, one sees that under the
identiﬁcation C∼,d ∼= C∼,d+χ (via ω), we have κd = κd+χ. On the other hand, if d>χ ,
then the functor Divd of eﬀective divisors of degreed is a Brauer-Severi stack over J d (by
which we mean that it is a projective bundle in the´etale topology), whose associated class
in H2
´et(J d,Gm) is clearly κd. Thus we see that for all d, κd is a torsion element.
§5.7. Proposition : c1 : Pic (J d) → H2
an(J d,Z) is injective.
Proof: If suﬃces to prove that for d large, Pic (J d) is ﬁnitely generated (since the kernel
of c1 must be inﬁnitely divisible). Now if X = C× Mg ×... ×Mg C (the d-fold product),
then we know that Pic (X) is ﬁnitely generated. Now we have a natural ﬁnite ﬂat map
X→ Divd; hence, via the associated norm map Pic (X) → Pic (Divd), we see that
Pic (Divd) is ﬁnitely generated. We also have a natural map π : Divd →J d (which
is a Brauer-Severi morphism), so if L is a line bundle on J d,t h e nL ∼= π∗π∗L.T h u s
π∗ : Pic (J d) → Pic (Divd) is an injection, and we are done. ⃝
§5.8. We now go back to working over an arbitrary base, which we denote by a sub-
script. Let X = C or J d. Then we have the following
Proposition : The natural map Pic (XZ) → Pic (XC) is injective with ﬁnite cokernel.
Proof: Injectivity follows from the fact that H0(XR, OXR )= R for any ring R. The rest
follows from the preceding paragraph. ⃝
§5.9. Given any relative Brauer-Severi stack f : X → S, we obtain a bundle of
Grassmannians f ∼ : X∼ → S (in the ´etale topology) by considering the lines in the
projective spaces of the ﬁbres of f. Applying this construction to Divd →J d (for d>χ ),
we obtain a map ψ : Gd →J d. Denote by ζ the canonical bundle on Gd for ψ.W r i t e
Pic Q(?)f o r Pic(?) ⊗Z Q. We call elements of Pic Q( ? ) “virtual line bundles”. Denote
by γ ∈ Pic Q (Gd)t h eQ-multiple ζ such that restricted to the ﬁbres of ψ, it is the line
bundle that deﬁnes the Pl¨ucker embedding.
Deﬁnition : We shall refer to the following diagram as the main ﬁbration :
Gd ψ
−→ J d ϕ
−→ M g
We now wish to deﬁne a canonical element Θd ∈ Pic Q(J d) which has relative ﬁrst Chern
class with respect toϕ equal toE. We do this as follows. SinceJ0 →M g has the canonical
identity section, we can deﬁne Θ 0 by requiring that the pull-back via the identity section
be trivial. For arbitrary d, we consider μd : J d →J 0 given by composing the map
50

“multiplication by χ”f r o mJ d to J dχ with the map “subtract oﬀ ω⊗d”f r o mJ dχ to J0.
Then we deﬁne Θ d to be ( 1
χ2 )μ∗
dΘ0. Note that if χ divides d,w i t hχ = Nd,t h e nΘd =t h e
pull-back of Θ0 via the map “subtract oﬀ ω⊗N ”f r o mJ d to J0.W h e nd is ﬁxed, we shall
often omit it in the symbol Θd.
§5.10. Theorem : Pic (XR) is ﬁnitely generated, for X = Mg ; J d;o r Gd and R
= Z or C. Moreover, for such R,
Pic Q Mg ∼= Q, generated by λ;
Pic Q J d ∼= Q2, generated by ϕ∗λ and Θ ;
Pic Q Gd ∼= Q3, generated by γ, (ϕψ)∗λ,a n d ψ∗Θ .
(For convenience, we shall write λ instead of ϕ∗λ, etc.) Thus via pull-back, we obtain a
ﬁltration, which we shall refer to as the main ﬁltration,o n Pic Q Gd which has subquotients
of dimension 1: 0= F0 ⊆ F1 ⊆ F2 ⊆ F3 = Pic Q Gd,w h e r eF1 ∼= Pic Q Mg ,a n d
F2 ∼= Pic Q J d.
Proof: Clear from the previous results in this Section. ⃝
§6. The Main Fibration
§6.1. In this Section, we study the “the main ﬁbration” deﬁned in §5. We construct
various maps from Hurwitz-type schemes into G, and use these to prove some facts about
the Picard group of the Hurwitz scheme and of G.( H e r ed is ﬁxed, and so we write G for
Gd.)
§6A. The Excess Divisors in the Main Fibration
§6.2. We return to working over the ring R of §1. We ﬁx b,d,a n d g, and assume
further that g ≥ 5, and that d> 2g + 4. For simplicity we shall denote HRSb,d by H and
NS b,d by H. Let us denote by H∼ the open substack of H that parametrizes admissible
coverings with the following two properties:
(1) the nodal curve upstairs has an irreducible component which is smooth
of genus g;
(2) the genus zero curve downstairs has at most two irreducible components.
51

Let us note that under the natural map H→ Mg (§3.27), H∼ maps into Mg.O n t h e
other hand, if we denote NO b,d by H
+
,t h e nw eh a v ea n´etale covering f : H
+
→ H.T h u s
f is a Galois covering with Galois group equal to Γ
def
= Sb. We denote by H+, H∼,+ the
pull-backs of H, H∼ via f. Thus we have a commutative diagram:
H+ −→ H ∼,+ −→ H
+
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓f
H− →H ∼ −→ H
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
Mg −→ Mg
where all the horizontal arrows are open immersions.
§6.3. Let us note that the relative dimension of G over R is: 2((d +1 − g) − 2) +g +
3(g − 1) = 2d +2 g − 2 − 3= b − 3 (by the Riemann-Hurwitz formula). But this is the
dimension (over R)o f H. In fact, we have the following
Proposition : There is a natural open immersion κ : H→G .
Proof: Let S be an R-scheme. Then elements of H+(S) correspond to diagrams:
C
α
−→ P1
S
β ↘
⏐⏐↓γ
S
where C → S is a smooth curve of genusg,a n dC → P1
S is a degree d and has only simple
ramiﬁcation. By assigning to this element the triple {(C → S) ∈M g(S),α ∗(OP1
S
(1)) ∈
J d(S), (γ∗(OP1
S
(1)) → β∗(α∗(OP1
S
(1)))) ∈G (S)}, we obtain a morphism H+ →G which
is clearly invariant under the action of Γ. Hence we get a morphismκ : H→G .I ti sc l e a r
from the deﬁnitions and by looking at the situation when S is the spectrum of an artinian
ring that κ is ´etale. It is also clear from the deﬁnitions that κ is injective on geometric
points. Thus κ must be an open immersion. ⃝
§6.4. The next order of business is to understand what the complementG− κ(H)l o o k s
like. To do this, we work over an algebraically closed ﬁeld k (that is an R-algebra). Let C
be a smooth, proper, connected curve over k,a n dl e tL be a line bundle of degree d on C.
Let V =Γ (C, L), P = Pk(V ∧), where “ ∧” for us will always mean the dual space. Thus
dimk V = d +1 − g, dimk P = d − g,a n dP may be thought of as the space of eﬀective
divisors that give rise to L.Am a p α : C → P1
k (considered up to automorphisms of P1
k)
such that α∗(OP1
S
(1)) = L may be thought of as a line L in P such that:
52

(1) There doesn’t exist any pointp ∈ C(k) that appears in every divisor in
L.
On the other hand, what does it mean to say that α has at most simple ramiﬁcation? It
means that every divisor in L that is not made up of d distinct points has d − 1d i s t i n c t
points, so only one point has coeﬃcient not equal to 1, and that coeﬃcient is 2. In other
words, we must require that:
(2) L doesn’t include a divisor that contains 3p for some p ∈ C(k);
(3) L doesn’t include a divisor that contains 2p +2 q for some p, q ∈ C(k).
Now let G = the Grassmannian of lines inP.T h e ndim
k G =2 (d − g − 1). Let δG denote
the ample generator of the Picard group of G. If we think of G as parametrizing rank 2
quotients V ∧ →Q ,t h e nδG corresponds to ∧2Q. Let us consider the diagram:
Δ ⊆ C × C
π1 ↙↘ π2
CC
(Diagram 6.1)
Let i be such that d − i> 2g − 2. We consider the line bundles M(i) =( π∗
1 L)(−iΔ).
Let Ei = π2,∗(M(i)); it has rank d − g +1 − i. Let us denote by G(a vector bundle)t h e
Grassmannian of 2-dimensional quotients of thedual of the vector bundle. Now clearly we
have a natural locally split injectionE1 →E 0 which gives rise to a morphismρ3 : G(E1) →
G(E0). Now E0 is simply the pull-back to C of the k-vector space V ,s o G(E0)= C × G.
If we compose ρ3 with the projection to G, we obtain a morphism σ3 : G(E1) → G which
is clearly generically injective and whose image consists precisely of the linesL that do no
satisfy (1). Since dimk G(E1)= dimk (G) − 1, this image is some irreducible eﬀective
divisor D3, whose degree we will compute in §6B.
We also have a natural locally split injectionE3 →E 0 which gives rise to a morphism
P(E3,∧) → P(E0,∧)= C × P. If we then compose with the projection to P,w eg e ta
morphism ρ1 : P(E3,∧) → P which is clearly generically injective and whose image consists
exactly of the bad divisors that appear in (2). The image in P is an irreducible variety
V1 of codimension 2. Let us now consider the incidence variety I ⊆ P × G of points
(p, L)w i t hp ∈ P(k), L ∈ G(k) such that the point p lies on the line L. Then it is well-
known that I is a P1-bundle over G and a P(d−g−1)-bundle over P. Denote by IV1 the
pull-back of I (regarded as an object over P) via V1 → P.L e t σ1 : IV1 → G denote the
composition of the natural inclusionsIV1 ⊆ I ⊆ P ×G with the projection to G.I ti sc l e a r
(by elementary algebraic geometry) that σ1 is generically injective. On the other hand,
dimk IV1 = dimk (G) − 1, so the image of IV1 in G is some irreducible divisor D1 whose
points are exactly the bad lines that appear in condition (2). We shall compute the degree
of D
1 in §6B.
53

IV1 ⊆ I ⊆ P × G
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓ ↙↘
V1 ⊆ PG
Now let us consider the following diagram:
Δ12,Δ13 ⊆ C × C × C
↙ π12
⏐⏐↓π23 π13 ↘
C × CC × CC × C
(Diagram 6.2)
where the πij’s are the respective projections and Δ ij = π−1
ij (Δ). Let us suppose that
i, j are such that d − i − j> 2g − 2. Let F(i,j) =( π∗
1 L)(−iΔ12 − jΔ13). Let K(i,j) =
π23,∗F(i,j).T h e nK(i,j) is a vector bundle on C × C of rank d +1 − g − i − j. Note that
we have a natural locally split injection K(2,2) →K (0,0) which gives rise to a morphism
P(K(2,2),∧) → P(K(0,0),∧)= C × C × P. Composing with the projection P,w eg e ta
morphism P(K(2,2),∧) → P which is clearly generically injective after taking the quotient
by the action of Z/2Z permuting the two factors ofC, and whose image consists exactly of
the bad divisors that appear in (3). The image is an irreducible varietyV2 of codimension
2i n P.F o r m i n gIV2 and σ2 : IV2 → G as before, we see that σ2 is generically injective,
and that its image in G is some irreducible divisor D2 whose points are exactly the bad
lines that appear in condition (3). We shall compute the degree of D2 in §6B.
In particular, since G ̸= D1
⋃ D2
⋃D3, we see that we can always construct a map
α : C → P1 with at most simple ramiﬁcation. Thus ψ ◦κ is surjective. Note that instead of
working over k, then, we could have worked over J d. In summary, we have the following:
Proposition : The complement of κ(H) in G consists of three relative divisors D1,
D2,a n d D3 over J d, which are also geometrically irreducible over J d. They correspond,
respectively, to the linear pencils that fail to meet one of the conditions (2),(3),o r (1)
listed at the beginning of this §.
§6.5. We now wish to relate these divisors ofG to the divisors of H constructed in §4.
To do this, we shall need to construct some sort of map fromH (or at least part of it) into
G. This is a somewhat delicate task, which we now undertake.
We shall call divisors at inﬁnity of H∼,+ or H
+
that lie over divisors of species X in
H∼ or H “divisors of species X”, as well. We propose to extend the mapμ′ : H+ →H
κ
→G
to a map μ : H∼,+ →G . For any two distinct integers i and j between 1 and b,l e tu s
denote by Uij the open substack of H∼,+ parametrizing admissible covers for which the
marking sections numberedi and j of the curve downstairs lie in the irreducible component
of the curve downstairs which is the image of the curve of genus g upstairs. Then it is
easy to see that, as i, j ranges over all admissible values, the union of the Uij is all of
54

H∼,+, while the intersection of the Uij is H+. Thus, to deﬁne our extension μ, it suﬃces
to deﬁne, on each Uij, a morphism Uij →G that restricts to μ′ on H+.L e t f : C→P
denote the universal admissible covering overH∼,+.L e tσ1,...,σ b : H∼,+ →P denote the
marking sections. Let Ei denote the schematic inverse image via f of σi.L e t C′ →H ∼,+
denote the smooth curve of genusg obtained by blowing downC as in the diagram of§3.27;
thus we have a blow-down mapπ : C→C ′.L e tE′
i denote the push-forward of the divisor
Ei via π.S i n c eC′ is a regular scheme, E′
i deﬁnes a line bundle Li on C′,a l o n gw i t ha
global section si of Li corresponding to E′
i.N o w Li deﬁnes a morphism νi : H∼,+ →J d
(the universal Jacobian). Since it is clear that νi and νj coincide when restricted to H+,
it follows (since H∼,+ is separated and integral) that νi = νj. Now it follows from the
deﬁnition of Uij that over Uij, the restrictions of E′
i and E′
j to any geometric ﬁbre of
C′ →H ∼,+ are distinct divisors. Thus, over Uij, the pair E′
i and E′
j deﬁne a pencil, that
is, a morphism μij : Uij →G whose composite with the projection G→J d is νi = νj.
Clearly this morphism restricts to μ′ on H+. Thus, gluing together the μij, we obtain our
μ. The behavior of μ on divisors at inﬁnity is given by the following
Proposition : Suppose that d> 2g +4 .T h e n μ maps divisors of Species 1 (resp.
2, 3B∗)i n t o D1 (resp. D2, D3); moreover, the restriction of μ to the excess divisors is a
quasi-ﬁnite morphism. On the other hand, μ maps the nonexcess divisors to subsets of
codimension at least two that lie outside the image of κ. In particular, the inverse image
divisor via μ of D1 (resp. D2, D3)i sa positive linear combination of all the divisors of
H∼,+ of Species 1 (resp. 2, 3B∗). Finally, the image via μ of any excess divisor is dense
in the restriction of the corresponding Di to any geometric ﬁbre of G→M g .
Proof: First, we note that it follows immediately from the deﬁnition ofμ and the explicit
descriptions of the excess divisors given in §4t h a tμ maps a divisor of Species 1 (resp. 2,
3B∗)i n t oD1 (resp. D2, D3); the assertion on quasi-ﬁniteness is also clear from the explicit
descriptions in §4.
Now let us prove the ﬁnal statement. We ﬁx a geometric point c : Spec(k) →M g,
where k is an algebraically closed ﬁeld (of characteristic greater than b). Then it suﬃces
to show that the generic point of Di|c (for i =1 ,2,3) corresponds to a morphism C → P1
which appears in an admissible covering of Species 1, 2, or 3B∗. Let us ﬁrst note that the
three irreducible divisors Di|c in G (i =1 ,2,3) are distinct: there are many ways to see
this; one way is simply to note that if any two were equal, then their degrees, as computed
in Theorem 21 of §6B would coincide; but an elementary calculation reveals that this is
absurd. We now proceed case by case.
For i = 1, a simple combinatorial check reveals that it suﬃces to show that the generic
pencil in D1|c does not contain two divisors each of which has a point of multiplicity three.
But in the notation of §6.4, this amounts to checking that the set of lines in P that pass
through two points of V1 has codimension at least two in G, but this is clear.
For i = 2, there are two points to check: ﬁrst, that the generic pencil does not contain
two divisors each of which has two points of multiplicity two; but this follows by the same
argument as in the previous paragraph. Second, we must check that the generic pencil
does not contain a divisor which has three points of multiplicity two; but the subvariety
55

V3 ⊆ P consisting of divisors with three points of multiplicity two has codimension three
in P (since we assume that d> 2g + 4). Thus, the subvariety ofG consisting of lines in P
that pass through V3 has codimension two, as desired.
For i = 3, here we need to show that the generic pencil does not contain two base
points. But one sees immediately that the subvariety of G corresponding to pencils with
two base points has dimension 2(d − 3) + 2 = 2d − 4, i.e., has codimension two in G,a s
desired.
We now turn to considering the nonexcess divisors. Let us suppose thatx : Spec(k) →
H∼,+ is a geometric point that lands in a nonexcess divisor. One piece of information of
an admissible covering that is clearly preserved byμ is the unique nonconstant morphism,
which we shall henceforth refer as the central morphism of the admissible covering,f r o m
the curve of genus g upstairs to a copy of P1 downstairs. Thus, let us suppose that μ(x)
lands inside the image of κ. Then the central morphism of x must be ramiﬁed over b
distinct points downstairs; but since the curve downstairs in the admissible covering x
is stable, this could only happen if the curve downstairs in x is, in fact, smooth,w h i c h
contradicts the assumption that x lies in a nonexcess divisor. Thus, μ(x) must land inside
one of the Di. Now let us suppose that μ(x) lands in a suﬃciently generic point of Di.
Then by our proof of the ﬁnal statement of the Proposition, it follows that the central
morphism of x is ramiﬁed over exactly b − 1 distinct points downstairs; thus, since the
curve downstairs in the admissible coveringx is stable, it follows by the same reasoning as
before, that the curve downstairs in x must be of type (b − 2,2). On the other hand, we
gave explicit descriptions in §4 of all the divisors of type ( b − 2,2); going down the list,
one sees that the only possiblity now for the nonexcess divisor in which x sits is Species
3B with g1 = g, g2 =0 . B u ti fd2 > 1, then the central morphism of x must have at least
two base points, which contradicts what we just saw in the previous paragraph. ⃝
§6.6. At this point, we need to employ a result which will not be proven until the end
of §7. We state it here for ease of reference:
Theorem : Under the assumption that d> 2g +4 , the line bundles deﬁned by D1, D2,
and D3 are linearly independent in the Picard group of G.
§6.7. Now by elementary algebraic geometry, we have an exact sequence:
ZD1 ⊕ ZD2 ⊕ ZD3 −→ Pic G− → Pic H− → 0
If we tensor withQ, and use the fact (§5) that Pic Q G = Q3, then we obtain the following
(again under the assumption that d> 2g +4 )
Corollary : D1, D2,a n d D3 form a basis of Pic Q G.
Corollary : Pic (H) is a ﬁnite group. The homomorphism Σ of §4.8, is a surjection
when tensored with Q.
56

Remark : Suppose we knew a priori or through some other technique that Pic (H)i s
ﬁnite. Then what we have done here would prove that Pic Q G has dimension 3. This, in
turn, would allow us to rederive in a more algebraic way many of the cohomological results
of Harer (up to torsion) which were recalled in §5.3. Given all the explicit calculations
done in the paper, it does not seem unreasonable to expect that one could, by closer
examination, prove that Pic (H) is ﬁnite in an a priori fashion. At the present time,
however, the author has not succeeded in doing this.
§6.8. Remark : It is now of interest to compute the coeﬃcient matrix relating the
basis {D
1, D2, D3} and the basis {λ,Θ,γ}. We shall do this in the next Section.
§6B. Intersection Theory Calculations
§6.9. Returning to the situation over an algebraically closed ﬁeldk as in the beginning
of §6.4, the purpose of this Subsection is to compute the “degree” of the divisors D1, D2,
and D3 in G, where by “degree”, we really mean the number N such that a divisor is
linearly equivalent toδ⊗N
G . We begin by reviewing some basic facts about the geometry of
Grassmannians.
§6.10. Lemma : Let X ⊆ P be an irreducible variety of codimension 2.T h e n i f
we construct IX and the associated generically injective morphism IX → G as in §6.4,t h e
degree of the image of this morphism in G is equal to the degree of X in P .
Proof: Let e = the degree of X in P. Then one knows (e.g. from [14]) that if one selects
a linear subspace Q ⊆ P of dimension 2 and a point q ∈ Q, the subvariety of G formed of
lines in Q that pass through q gives rise to a cycle which is dual to δG. Thus it suﬃces
to intersect X with a generic linear subspace Q ⊆ P of dimension 2 such that X ⋂Q has
e points {x1,...,x e}, and to choose a generic q ∈ Q that doesn’t sit on any line passing
through two of the xi’s. Then clearly there are exactly e lines in Q that pass through q
and intersect X, and moreover, the intersection between the image of IX in G and the
cycle associated to {Q, q} is clearly transverse. Hence the Lemma. ⃝
§6.11. Let S be a smooth, proper, connected curve over k;l e t E be a vector bundle
of rank r +1o n S.W e u s e t h e C h o w r i n g sAi(−). Write ϵ = c1(E) ∈ A1(S). Let
P1 = P(E), L1 = OP1 (1). Then we have an exact sequence 0 →F →E P1 →L 1 →
0, where the subscript denotes pull-back and F is deﬁned by this exact sequence. Let
P2 = P(F), L2 = OP2 (1). On the other hand, let G′ = G(E), and let Q be the universal
quotient of E on G′.L e t P3 = P(Q), L3 = OP3 (1). Then clearly P2 ∼= P3,w i t hL1 and
L3 corresponding under this isomorphism. We thus have a diagram:
57

P2 ∼= P3
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
P1 G′
↘
⏐⏐↓
S
Let us denote ∧2Q by δ′.L e tκi = c1(Li) ∈ A1(Pi)f o ri =1 ,2,3. Then we have
A∗(P1)= A∗(S)[κ1]/(κr+1
1 − κr
1ϵ), so κN
1 =0f o r N ≥ r +2 .
A∗(P3)= A∗(G′)[κ3]/(κ2
3 − c1(Q)κ3 + c2(Q)).
Note that if we identify A∗(P2)a n dA∗(P3), we have κ1 = κ3, c1(Q)= κ1 + κ2, c2(Q)=
κ1κ2. Let us denote the fundamental class of S by η,s o ϵ = deg(E)η.
§6.12. Lemma : We have the following identities:
(1) κr+1
i = ϵκr
i ; hence κr+2
i =0f o r i =1 ,2.
(2) κr−1
1 κr
2 + κr
1κr−1
2 = ϵκr−1
1 κr−1
2 ;
(3) If ϵ =0 ,t h e nκr−2
1 κr
2 + κr
1κr−2
2 = −κr−1
1 κr−1
2 .
Proof: We give the proof assertion by assertion:
(1) This is elementary and well-known.
(2) ct(F)=( 1 − ϵt)(1 − κ1t)−1. If we substitute formally by t = κ−1
2
and multiply by κr
2, the result will be zero. So we do this and multiply
further by κr−1
1 :0 = κr
2κr−1
1 (1 − ϵ
κ2
)(1 − κ1
κ2
)−1 = κr
2κr−1
1 + κr−1
2 κr
1 +
κr−2
2 ϵκr
1 − ϵκr−1
2 κr−1
1 − ϵκr−2
2 κr
1. Rearranging terms gives the result.
(3) Same technique as in (2), but with ϵ = 0, and we multiply by κr−2
1
instead of κr−1
1 :0 = κr
2κr−2
1 (1 − κ1
κ2
)−1 = κr
2κr−2
1 + κr−1
2 κr−1
1 + κr−2
2 κr
1.
⃝
§6.13. Lemma : c1(δ′)2r−1 =( 2
r+1 )
(2r−1
r
)
deg (E).
Proof: Using the previous Lemma:
58

c1(δ′)2r−1 =( κ1 + κ2)2r−1
= ϵκr−2
1 κr
2
(2r − 1
r +1
)
+ κr−1
1 κr
2
(2r − 1
r
)
+ κr
1κr−1
2
(2r − 1
r
)
+ ϵκr
1κr−2
2
(2r − 1
r +1
)
= ϵκr−1
1 κr−1
2
(2r − 1
r
)
− ϵκr−1
1 κr−1
2
(2r − 1
r +1
)
Now the result follows from the fact that since κr
1κr−1
2 η is clearly the fundamental class
of P3, κr−1
1 κr−1
2 η must be the fundamental class ofG′, and by the elementary calculation:(2r−1
r
)
−
(2r−1
r+1
)
= (2r−1)!
r!(r−2)! ( 1
r−1 − 1
r+1 )=2 (2r−1)!
(r+1)!(r−1)! =( 2
r+1 )
(2r−1
r
)
. ⃝
§6.14. Lemma : If ϵ =0 ,t h e nc1(δ′)2(r−1) = 1
r−1
(2r−2
r
)
.
Proof: Using §6.12:
c1(δ′)2(r−1) =( κ1 + κ2)2r−2
= κr−2
1 κr
2
(2r − 2
r
)
+ κr−1
1 κr−1
2
(2r − 2
r − 1
)
+ κr
1κr−2
2
(2r − 2
r
)
= κr−1
1 κr−1
2
{(2r − 2
r − 1
)
−
(2r − 2
r
)}
But
(2r−2
r−1
)
−
(2r−2
r
)
= (2r−2)!
(r−1)!(r−2)! ( 1
r−1 − 1
r )= (2r−2)!
r!(r−1)! = 1
r−1
(2r−2
r
)
. ⃝
§6.15. Proposition : [D3]= dδG, where the brackets denote the linear equivalence
class.
Proof: In the calculations of §6.11 ∼ 14, set G′ = G(E1,∧). Recall our map σ3 : G′ → G.
Clearly σ∗
3(δG)= δ′ (i.e., the analogous bundle for G′ to δG on G). Suppose [D3]= Nδ G.
Since here r +1= d − g, we see from §6.14, that c1(δ′)2r−1 = N(c1(δG))2r = N(1
r )
(2r
r+1
)
.
On the other hand, by §6.13, c1(δ′)2r−1 =( 2
r+1 )
(2r−1
r
)
deg (E1,∧). Thus N = −deg (E1).
The result thus is a consequence of the following:
§6.16. Lemma : If d − i> 2g − 2, then deg (Ei)= −di − (g − 1)i(i − 1).
Proof: Referring to Diagram 6.1 of §6.4, we see that we have exact sequences:
0 −→ (π∗
1 L)(−(i +1 ) Δ ) −→ (π∗
1 L)(−iΔ) −→ (ω⊗i ⊗L )Δ −→ 0
Pushing forward by π2,w eg e t :
59

0 −→ E i+1 −→ E i −→ ω⊗i ⊗L − → 0
Hence we obtain deg (Ei+1)= deg (Ei) − d − 2i(g − 1). Since deg (E0) = 0, the result
follows. ⃝
§6.17. Proposition : [D1]= {3d +6 (g − 1)}δG =3 (b − d)δG.
Proof: By §6.10, it suﬃces to compute the degree of V1 in P (notation as in the relevant
part of §6.4). Since ρ∗
1(OP (1)) = OP(E3,∧)(1). Thus if α = c1(OP (1)), α′ = c1(OP(E3,∧)(1)),
and V1 is of degreeN,t h e n(α′)d−g−2 = Nαd−g. On the other hand, from basic facts about
projective bundles, we know that (α′)d−g−2 = deg (E3,∧)= −deg (E3). Now apply §6.16.
⃝
§6.18. Lemma : Assuming, as usual, that d> 2g +2 , we have the following Chern
classes on C × C:
c1(K(2,2))= −(b − 4)(η1 + η2)+4 δ
c2(K(2,2))=( b − 4)(b − 6) − 24g,
where on C × C, ηi is the pull-back of the fundamental class of the ith factor, for i =1 ,2,
and δ= c1(Δ) − η1 − η2,w h e r eΔ is the diagonal.
Proof: First of all, K(0,2) = π∗
2 E2.T h u sc(K(0,2))=1 −{ 2d +2 (g − 1)}η2. On the other
hand, we have exact sequences on C × C × C:
0 −→ F (2,2) −→ F (1,2) −→ π∗
12{(ω)Δ }⊗ π∗
13M(2) −→ 0
0 −→ F (1,2) −→ F (0,2) −→ π∗
12(OΔ ) ⊗ π∗
13M(2) −→ 0
Applying π23,∗, we obtain exact sequences on C × C:
0 −→ K (2,2) −→ K (1,2) −→ π∗
1(ω) ⊗M (2) −→ 0
0 −→ K (1,2) −→ K (0,2) −→ π∗
1(OC) ⊗M (2) −→ 0
Now c(M(2))=1+( d − 2)η1 − 2η2 − 2δ,w h e r eδ2 = −2g, δη1 = δη2 = 0. Thus we obtain:
c(K(1,2))= c(K(2,2)){1+( d +2 g − 4)η1 − 2η2 − 2δ}
c(K(0,2))= c(K(1,2)){1+( d − 2)η1 − 2η2 − 2δ}
60

Thus we have:
c(K(2,2))= {1 − bη2}{1+( d − 2)η1 − 2η2 − 2δ}−1{1+( b − d − 2)η1 − 2η2 − 2δ}−1
= {1 − bη2}{1 − (d − 2)η2 +2 η2 +2 δ− 4(d − 2)η1η2 +4 δ2}
{1 − (b − d − 2)η1 +2 η2 +2 δ− 4(b − d − 2)η1η2 +4 δ2}
= {1 − bη2}{1 − (b − 4)η1 +4 η2 +4 δ− 6(b − 4)η1η2 +1 2δ2}
= {1 − (b − 4)(η1 + η2)+4 δ+( b − 4)(b − 6)η1η2 +1 2δ2}
⃝
§6.19. Let S be a proper, smooth, connected surface over k.L e tE be a vector bundle
on S of rank r +1 . L e tα = c1(OP(E∧)(1)). Then we have the following:
Lemma : αr+2 = c2
1(E) − c2(E).
Proof: We have αr+1 = −c1(E)αr − c2(E)αr−1.T h e nαr+2 = −c1(E)αr+1 − c2(E)αr =
{c2
1(E) − c2(E)}αr, as desired. ⃝
§6.20. Proposition : [D2]= 1
2 {b(b − 10) + 8d}δG.
Proof: As in §6.17, we apply §6.10, and we see that if we takeS = C × C and E = K(2,2),
so that r +1= d − g − 3, we have 1
2 αr+2 =[ D2]. Thus by §6.19, §6.18, we have 2[D2]=
2(b − 4)2 − (b − 4)(b − 6) + (−32g)+2 4g =( b − 4)(b − 2) − 8g = b(b − 10) + 8d. ⃝
§6.21. To summarize, we have the following
Theorem : The degrees of the excess divisors in G are as follows:
[D1]=3 ( b − d) δG
[D2]= 1
2 {b(b − 10) + 8d} δG
[D3]= dδG
§6C. Ramiﬁcation Indices
§6.22. Let us consider the morphism μ : H∼,+ →G constructed in §6.5. Now H+ ⊆
H∼,+ as an open subscheme, and the complement of this open subscheme consists of certain
divisors at inﬁnity. In this Subsection, we wish to compute the indices of ramiﬁcation of μ
at the excess divisors. These computations will be important for§7. Note that we continue
to assume here that g ≥ 5a n dd> 2g +4 .
61

Note that all this is taking place over Z[ 1
N ], where N = b!. On the other hand, G
is deﬁned over Z, which prompts the question: What is the nature of the ramiﬁcation of
μ′ : H+ →H
κ
−→ G, over the primes p dividing N? In fact, we shall see that there is no
ramiﬁcation at the odd primes.
§6.23. We begin with the ramiﬁcation ofμ at the excess divisor of Species 2. Note that
in this case, the diﬀerent (though not the discriminant) is ´etale over the base; thus, the
process of “ordering the sections” gives rise to a covering of G which is ´etale over D2.L e t
f : C→P denote the universal admissible covering overH∼,+.L e tσ1,...,σ b : H∼,+ →P
be the b marking sections; suppose that σi lifts to ρi : H∼,+ →C ,a tw h i c hf is simply
ramiﬁed. Let ℘ be a prime divisor of height one of H∼,+ which “is” a divisor at inﬁnity
of Species 2. Let U be an open substack of H∼,+ that contains ℘ and is so small that the
normal sheaves of theσb (which are line bundles onH∼,+) are trivial when restricted toU.
Choose trivializations τ1,...,τ b for these normal sheaves overU.L e tU ′ → U be the ´etale
covering that parametrizes trivializations of the normal sheaves of theρi whose squares are
the trivializations τi.L e t ℘′ be a prime of U ′ that lies over ℘. Note that with this extra
rigidiﬁcation, a generic admissible covering of Species 2 loses all its automorphisms, so that
U
′ is a scheme in a neighborhood of℘′.L e tA be the completion ofU ′ at ℘′.I t i s t h u sc l e a r
from the general theory of algebraic stacks and their associated coarse moduli spaces (see,
e.g., [11], p. 23) that to determine the desired index of ramiﬁcation, we must simply do the
following: consider the group Γ = Gal(U
′/U) ∼= (Z/2Z)b that acts on the added structure
of choosing “speciﬁc square roots of uniformizers over points of simple ramiﬁcation”. The
inertia subgroup I at ℘′ is isomorphic to ( Z/2Z) and sits inside the ( Z/2Z)2 ⊆ Γt h a t
corresponds to the two points of simple ramiﬁcation on the P1’s upstairs. Then from the
equivalent deﬁnition of A as the solution to a certain inﬁnitesimal moduli problem, we see
that I acts nontrivially onA.L e tB = AI, the ring of invariants. ThenB is also a discrete
valuation ring, and the desired index of ramiﬁcation is the the same as that of A over B.
Looking at the explicit description given in [19], §4, p. 62, however, we see that I takes
some uniformizer of A to minus itself; hence the index of ramiﬁcation must be 2.
Proposition : μ has ramiﬁcation index 2 at excess divisors of Species 2.
§6.24. Let us now note that H∼,+ is already a scheme at the generic points of divisors
of Species 1 and 3 B∗; indeed, for those Species, once we order the points, there are no
automorphisms.
Now since generically, in the case of either of these excess divisors, at most two of the
b sections come together as one degenerates from an ordinary Hurwitz covering, it is clear
that the ramiﬁcation index is either 1 or 2. Thus, to show that in both of these cases the
ramiﬁcation index is, in fact, 2, it suﬃces to construct one example whereS = Spec C[[x]],
C → S a proper, smooth curve of genus g, with a diagram:
Cη
fη
−→ P1
η
↘
⏐⏐↓
η ⊆ S
62

such that fη is an ordinary Hurwitz covering which generates to a covering of Species 1 or
3B∗ and such that if T = S ×G H∼,+,t h e nT → S is ramiﬁed.
§6.25. We construct such examples using the theory of vanishing cycles reviewed in the
Appendix to §4. Let S = Spec R,w i t hR = C[[x]], Ri = C[[xi]] ⊆ R for i a natural number,
Si = Spec R i. Choose distinct nonzero complex numbers λ2,...,λ b−1 and denote the
corresponding sections of P1 by σ2,...,σ b−1. We will later subject the complex numbers
λi to a further condition which the generic choice ofλi’s will fulﬁll (assuming d to be large).
By abuse of notation, we also denote by σ2,...,σ b−1 the sections pulled back to S1, S2,
and S3.W r i t eC[[T]] for the completed local ring at the point 0 ofP1
C.L e t( f o ri =0 ,1) σi
be the section of P1
S3 which is the graph of the mapS3 → P1
C given by T ↦→ (−1)iX3.L e t
τ be the unique nontrivial element of the Galois group of S3 over S6.T h e nτ(σi)= σ1−i
for i =0 ,1, which τ(σi)= σi for i ≥ 2. Denote by ηi the generic point of Si.N o w i f
Gi = Gal (k(η)/k(ηi)), where k(η)= k(ηi) for all i,t h e nw eh a v eG1 ⊆ G3 ⊆ G6,a n d
G1 ⊆ G2 ⊆ G6. Choosing a root of unity, we get isomorphisms Gi ∼= Z∧ for all i.L e t ζi
be the canonical generator of Gi under this isomorphism. Then ζ2
6 = ζ3, ζ3
6 = ζ2, ζ6
6 = ζ1.
Moreover ζ6 acts like τ on the σi’s.
“Drawing” paths around the σi’s, we see that the fundamental group Γ of P1
η −
{σ0,σ1,...,σ b−1} = Uη may be described as the (proﬁnite completion of the) free group
on generators g0,g1,...,g b−1 modulo the sole relation g0g1g2 ...g b−1 = 1. A simple calcu-
lation reveals the action of ζ6 on Γ is given by g0 ↦→ g0, g1 ↦→ g−1
1 g0g1, gi ↦→ gi for i ≥ 2.
A connected ´etale covering of Uη of degree d is deﬁned by a transitive action of Γ on the
set {1,...,d } of d elements. This covering is rational over ηi if and only if the action of
Γ obtained by composing the original action with the automorphism of Γ deﬁned by ζi is
the same as the original action. Finally, note that the subscheme σ0
⋃σ1 of P1
S3 descends
to a closed, irreducible subscheme of P1
S6 ,w h i c h ,a sa nS6-scheme, is isomorphic to S3,
hence ramiﬁed over S6.
The Case of Species 1 : Choose a transitive sequence of b transpositions in Sd whose
product is 1 to assign consecutively to g0,...,g b−1, such that the ﬁrst two transpositions
are (12). We assume that the λi’s are chosen such that the curve of genusg in the special
ﬁbre over S in the covering deﬁned by this sequence of transpositions has no nontrivial
automorphisms. (This will always be possible for d> 2g + 4 by Proposition 5.) Clearly ζ6
acts trivially on this homomorphism from Γ to Sd, so we get the example desired overS6.
The Case of Species 3B∗ : Choose a transitive sequence of transpositions as above that
gives rise this time to Species 3B∗, with the ﬁrst transposition being (12) and the second
(23). Again we assume the λi’s and sequence of transpositions chosen so that the curve of
genus g in the special ﬁbre over S has no nontrivial automorphisms. A simple calculation
reveals that ζ2 acts trivially on the induced homomorphism from Γ to Sd, so we obtain
the desired example over S2.
We have thus proven the following
Proposition : μ has ramiﬁcation index 2 at divisors of Species 1 and 3B
∗.
63

§6.26. Corollary : Assuming still that g ≥ 5 and d> 2g +4 , HROb,d and HUOb,d
are geometrically connected.
Proof: We treat the rigidiﬁed case; the unrigidiﬁed case is analogous. If not, there
would be a nontrivial maximal unramiﬁed extension between HROb,d and HRSb,d, but
our explicit computation of the ramiﬁcation shows that this is impossible. The result thus
follows from the corresponding result for HRSb,d (§2). ⃝
Remark : The referee has informed me that this last result was obtained by Clebsch
directly via purely combinatorial methods similar to those used in §2.
§6.27. In closing, we shall prove the following:
Proposition : μ is unramiﬁed over all odd primes p of Z.
Proof: As G is regular, it suﬃces to show, by the purity theorem, that there exists a
geometric point of H of any odd characteristic such that the covering of this geometric
point induced by H+ →H is ´etale. (Here we note that H can be deﬁned over Z as the
complement in G of the three divisors D1, D2,a n d D3, which are clearly deﬁned and
proper over Z.) Translated, this means that given an algebraically closed ﬁeld k of odd
characteristic p, we must ﬁnd a smooth, proper, connected curveC over k and a morphism
f : C → P1
k of degree d such that the discriminant of f is ´etale over k. But this clearly
follows from the analysis of §4, which works so long as k has odd characteristic. ⃝
Remark : It was the goal of this Subsection to determine the indices of ramiﬁcation
of μ at all the primes of height one of G (over Z). We have thus completed this task at
all primes except 2, where there is wild ramiﬁcation, thus making our goal at this prime
beyond the scope of this paper.
§7. The Coeﬃcient Matrix
§7.1. In this Section we shall complete the proof of Theorem 8 of §4 by showing that
the excess divisors in G are linearly independent in Pic(G), and, in the process, we shall
explicitly compute the coeﬃcients of λ,Θ ,a n d γ in terms of D
1, D2,a n d D3.T h i s
also gives us explicitly the “main ﬁltration” ( §5.10) in terms of the Di’s. We can thus
check the coeﬃcients of λ and Θ by making sure that they are in the kernel of the map
F3 → F3/F2 ∼= Q δG, which was computed explicitly in §6B. As usual, it suﬃces to work
over the complex ﬁeld C, so we will do that in this Section.
§7.2. Let us note, ﬁrst of all, that there exists a proper, smooth, connected curve S
(over C) with the following property: there exist enough morphisms φi : S → H
+
that
avoid nonexcess divisors so that if we write ψi : S →G for the morphism induced by
composing φi with κ, then the matrix {deg(ψ∗
i Fj)},w h e r ej =1 ,2,3; F1 = λ; F2 =Θ ;
F3 = γ, is of rank three. Indeed, we can prove the existence of such anS as follows. First,
64

take any nonconstant morphismf ′ : S′ →M g,w h e r eS′ is a proper, smooth, connect curve
(over C). (To see the existence of such an f ′, consider the Satake embedding Mg ↪→ PN
of the coarse moduli space Mg; since the divisors at inﬁnity of Mg m a pt os u b s e t so f
codimension ≥ 2 in the closure Mg of Mg in PN , one can construct a proper curve inside
Mg by cutting by hyperplane sections.) Let G′ = G× Mg S′. Now it follows from our
explicit analysis of Pic Q(G) that the natural morphism Pic Q(G) → Pic Q(G′)i s injective.
Moreover, it follows from Proposition 5 of §4 that the inverse images via G′ →G of
the images via μ of the nonexcess divisors are of codimension at least two in G′.T h u s ,
it suﬃces to prove the original statement for G′ instead of G; but since G′ is clearly a
projective scheme, the existence of S and the ψi follows by reducing to the case when G′
is a smooth, proper surface (by cutting with hyperplane sections) and then taking a basis
of the Q-N´eron-Severi group of the surface which consists of smooth very ample divisors.
The only remaining technical point is that it may at ﬁrst seem that we need to use diﬀerent
curves Si with ψi : Si → G′ (or G,o r H
+
), but in fact, it is elementary that given any
ﬁnite number of curves Si, there exists a curve S and ﬁnite morphisms αi : S → Si.T h i s
completes the proof.
Let us ﬁx one such morphism φ : S → H
+
. Now let us note that if we can prove
a linear relation between the degrees of the pull-backs via ψ of certain line bundles and
divisors from G for all φ as above, then the relation must, in fact, hold on G.
Now φ corresponds to some admissible coveringf ∼ : X∼ → P ∼ over S. Let us denote
by σ0,...,σ b−1 the sections S → P ∼ that make up the discriminant of f ∼.T h e s t a b l e
curve associated to p∼ : X∼ → S, which we shall call p : X → S (obtained as in §3.27),
is, in fact, smooth, and the only kinds of degeneracies that occur are those of Species 1,
2, or 3B∗. Let us denote by U ⊆ X the complement of the ﬁnite set of points that are
the points of degenerate ramiﬁcation in the ﬁbres of Species 3 B∗ (so there is exactly one
such point in each ﬁbre of Species 3B∗). Then one sees easily that f ∼ contracts to a map
f : U → P,w h e r eP is a P1-bundle over S. Thus we have a diagram:
X ⊇ U
f
−→ P
⏐⏐
↓
p ↙ π
S
By abuse of notation, we also denote byσi the push-forwards of the originalσi to sections
of π. We denote by τi the unique section of X → S that lies over σi and passes through
the points of ramiﬁcation. We denote by OP (1) some line bundle on P (which we ﬁx for
the entire discussion, but the choice of which is noncanonical) whose negative square is the
relative canonical bundle for P → S. (Note that we may need to replace S by some ﬁnite
´etale cover of S in order for OP (1) to exist.) Observe that the square of the ﬁrst Chern
class of OP (1) is zero. Let L be the unique line bundle on X such that, restricted to U,
it is equal to f ∗ OP (1). By abuse of notation, we will similarly write f ∗ F for other line
bundles F on P to denote the unique extension toX of the actual bundlef ∗ F on U.A l s o ,
65

let R = ∑b−1
i=0 τi, in the sense of divisors. Then we see that ωX =( p∗ ωS) ⊗ (f ∗ ωP/S )(R)
and ωX/S = f ∗ωP/S (R), where the various ω’s denote the respective canonical bundles.
Let hi denote the height of the section σi of π relative to OP (1). Thus, on P,w e
have σi · σj = hi + hj.L e tl = ∑hi. Let us choose two distinct, constant, but suﬃciently
generic divisors F1 and F2 on P which are of the form “the sum of a divisor which is a
(suﬃciently generic) section of P → S and various (suﬃciently generic) vertical divisors”
and which is such that OP (1) ∼= OP (F1) ∼= OP (F2). Let Gi be the divisor f −1 Fi on X,
for i =1 ,2, so that L ∼= OX(G1) ∼= OX(G2).
§7.3. We wish to compute the following intersection numbers of divisors on X:
(A) G2
1 = G2
2 = G1 · G2
(B) τi · G1 = τi · G2
(C) τi · τj (for i ̸= j)
(D) τ2
i
It is clear that it suﬃces to work locally over S, i.e., using local intersection theory. Thus
we let C = Spec A with A the completion of the local ring at some closed pointx of S and
obtain a diagram
X⊇ U− → P ∼= P1
C
⏐⏐↓p ↙ π
C
which is the result of applying the base change C→ S to the diagram in the previous §.
By abuse of notation, we continue to use the symbolsσi, τi for the base-changed sections.
Also note that it suﬃces to compute the result in the universal situation as a function of
the σ
i · σj’s and that formula will hold in general.
Finally, note that (in the global situation) ifq = the genus ofS, then by the adjunction
formula, we have:
2(q − 1) = τ2
i + τi · ωX
= τ2
i + τ2
i + τi · (R − τi)+ τi · p∗ωS + τi · f ∗ωP/S
=2 τ2
i + τi · (R − τi)+2 (q − 1) − 2τi · G1
Thus, τ2
i = −1
2 τi · (R − τi)+ τi · G1. Hence it suﬃces to compute (A), (B), and (C)
locally.
§7.4. We begin with the case of a closed point x ∈ S where the covering does not
degenerate. Then it is clear that:
66

(A) G1 · G2 =0
(B) τi ·G1 = 0 for most pointsx, except for a ﬁnite number of special points;
the sum of the local intersections over these points is hi.
(C) τi · τj =0f o r i ̸= j.
§7.5. Equally simple is the case of Species 2. Here we see that:
(A) G1 · G2 =0
(B) τi · G1 =0( s i n c eG1 is suﬃciently generic)
(C) τi · τj =0f o r i ̸= j.
§7.6. We now consider the case of Species 1. By reduction to the univeral case, we may
assume that σi · σj (where i ̸= j) is 0 except when {i, j} = {0, 1} in which case σ0 · σ1 =3 .
Now we have the following formulas for divisors:
f −1 (σ0)=2 τ0 + E0
f −1 (σ1)=2 τ1 + E1
where E0, E1 are eﬀective horizontal divisors of X of degree d − 2o v e rC.T h u s w e g e t :
3= σ0 · σ1 = f∗ (τ0) · σ1 = τ0 · f −1 (σ1)=2 τ0 · τ1 + τ0 · E1. But it is clear that τ0 · τ1
and τ0 · E1 are both positive integers. Thus τ0 · τ1 = 1. Returning to the general local
case of Species 1, we see that if for some m, k, σm · σk ̸= 0 while σi · σj = 0 for all other
combinations, then:
(A) G1 · G2 =0
(B) τi · G1 =0( s i n c eG1 is suﬃciently generic)
(C) τm · τk = 1
3 σm · σk, τi · τj = 0 for all other combinations {i, j}.
§7.7. The case of Species 3 B∗ is somewhat more involved. Let us ﬁrst note that by
reduction to the universal case, we may assume thatσ0 · σ1 =1 ,a n dσi · σj =0( f o ri ̸= j)
for all other combinations. Then if we deﬁne X ∼ to be the scheme obtained from C as a
result of two ordinary blow-ups at points taken in a certain fashion, thenf will extend to
a morphism f ∼ : X ∼ →P ∼ which is everywhere deﬁned and is the pull-back via C→ S of
the f ∼ of §7.2. Let X1 be the blow-up of X at the point of degenerate simple ramiﬁcation.
Denote by D the exceptional curve of this blow-up m : X1 →X .T h e nX ∼ is the blow-up
67

k : X ∼ →X 1 at a point of D.L e t C1 be the strict transform of D in X ∼ ,a n dC2 the
exceptional curve of k.L e th = m ◦k. Then we have a diagram:
X ∼
1
k
←− X ∼ f ∼
−→ P ∼
m ↘
⏐⏐↓h
⏐⏐↓g
X⊇ U
f
−→ P
⏐⏐↓p
⏐⏐↓π
C
id
−→ C
Moreover we have the sectionsσi of π, and their unique liftings σ∼
i to sections of π ◦g;o n
the other hand, we also have the sections τi of p lifting the σi, the sections τ(1)
i of p ◦m
lifting the τi, and the sectionsτ∼
i of p◦h again lifting theτi.L e t( f o ri =1 ,2) G(1)
i and G∼
i
be the respective strict transforms onX1 and X ∼ .L e tL(1) = m∗ L, L∼ = h∗ L = k∗ L(1),
M = g∗ OP(1), M∼ = f ∼,∗ M.N o wOP(1)·OP(1) = 0, soM·M =0 ,a n dM∼ ·M∼ =0 .
But clearly, M∼ = OX ∼ (G∼
1 )= OX ∼ (G∼
2 ), so ( G∼
1 )2 =( G∼
2 )2 = G∼
1 · G∼
2 =0 . O n
the other hand, k∗ D = C1 + C2 and D2 = −1, C2
2 = −1, C1 · C2 =1 ,s ow eg e t
−1= C2
1 +2 C1 · C2 + C2
2 , hence C2
1 = −2. Also, it is clear that for i =1 ,2, we have
G∼
i · C1 = 0 and G∼
i · C2 =1 .N o wL(1) = O(G(1)
i + D), so that L∼ = O(G∼
i + C1 +2 C2),
where i =1 ,2. Hence,
G1 · G2 = L·L = L∼ ·L ∼
=( G∼
1 + C1 +2 C2) · (G∼
2 + C1 +2 C2)
=4+( C1 +2 C2)2 =4 − 2 − 4+4=2
Let us now note the following easy relations: τ∼
0 · τ∼
1 =0 , τ∼
i · C1 =1 , τ∼
i · C2 =0 ,
τ∼
i · G∼
j =0f o ra l l i ∈{ 0, 1}, j ∈{ 1, 2}. Also, we see that h∗ τi = τ∼
i + C1 + C2,f o r
i ∈{ 0, 1}.T h u s ,
τ0 · τ1 = h∗τ0 · h∗τ1
=( τ∼
0 + C1 + C2) · (τ∼
1 + C1 + C2)
=2+( C1 + C2)2 =2 − 1=1
Finally, for any i ∈{ 0, 1}, j ∈{ 1, 2},
τi · Gj = h∗(τi) · h∗(Gj)
=( τ∼
i + C1 + C2) · (G∼
j + C1 +2 C2)=1+2 − 2=1
Returning to the general local case of Species 3B∗, we see that ifσm ·σk ̸= 0 for some
m, k and σi · σj = 0 for all other combinations of i, j with i ̸= j, then:
68

(A) G1 · G2 =2 σm · σk
(B) τi · G1 = σm · σk for i ∈{ m, k}, 0 otherwise.
(C) τm · τk = σm · σk, τi · τj = 0 for all other combinations such that i ̸= j.
§7.8. We are now ready to return to the global situation of §7.2 and compute global
intersection numbers. Let ν1 (resp. ν2, ν3) denote the number of points of S (with multi-
plicity) at which a degeneracy of Species 1 (resp. 2, 3B∗) occurs. Thus ν1+ν2+ν3 = l(b−1).
First, we see that L·L = G1 · G2 =2 ν3; hence ( f ∗ωP/S )2 =8 ν3.N e x t , w e h a v e
R ·L = ∑b−1
i=0 τi · G1 = l +2 ν3; hence R · (f ∗ωP/S )= −2(l +2 ν3). Finally, we have:
R2 =
b−1∑
i=0
τ2
i +2
∑
i<j
τi · τj
=
b−1∑
i=0
τ2
i + 1
2(
∑
i̸=j
τi · τj)+(
∑
i<j
τi · τj)
=
b−1∑
i=0
{τ2
i + 1
2τi · (R − τi)} +
∑
i<j
τi · τj
= R · G1 + 1
3ν1 + ν3
= l + 1
3ν1 +3 ν3
We have, after possibly enlarging S, a morphism α : S →G corresponding to the
diagram in §7.2. Let δi = deg (α∗Di). Then by §6C, we see that ν1 = 3
2 δ1, ν2 = δ2,
ν3 = 1
2 δ3. Thus we summarize as follows:
(1) 3δ1 +2 δ2 + δ3 =2 l(b − 1)
(2) (f ∗ ωP/S )2 =4 δ3
(3) R · (f ∗ ωP/S )= −2(l + δ3)
(4) R2 = l + 1
2 δ1 + 3
2 δ3.
§7.9. Let us compute λS = 1
12 (ωX/S)2 purely in terms of δ1, δ2,a n dδ3 (and not l).
We have:
69

ω2
X/S =( f ∗ ωP/S )2 + R2 +2 R · (f ∗ ωP/S )
= −3l + 1
2δ1 + 3
2δ3
= 1
2(b − 1) {−3(3δ1 +2 δ2 + δ3)+( b − 1)(δ1 +3 δ3)}
= 1
2(b − 1) {(b − 10)δ1 − 6δ2 +3 (b − 2)δ3}
Now by the reasoning of§7.2, by choosing variousφ, we obtain enough possibilities so that
any relation among line bundles on G that holds for all these possibilities must, in fact,
hold on G. Thus we obtain the following:
Proposition : λ = 1
24(b−1) {(b − 10)D1 − 6D2 +3 (b − 2)D3}
§7.10. It follows from the deﬁnition and from [26], Corollary 2.7.6 of Expos´eI I ,t h a t
ΘS = −1
2 (L− d
2(g−1) ωX/S)2.L e t χ =2 (g − 1). Then we see that ( −8χ2)Θ S =( χR −
bωX/S)2. Note that χ = b − 2d.T h e n
(−8χ)Θ S =( b − 2d)R2 − 2bR · (ωX/S)+( b2
χ )(ωX/S)2
= −(b +2 d)(l + 1
2δ1 + 3
2δ3)+4 b(l + δ3)
+ b2
2(b − 2d)(b − 1) {(b − 10)δ1 − 6δ2 +3 (b − 2)δ3}
Thus,
−16χ(b − 1)ΘS =( 3b − 2d)(3δ1 +2 δ2 + δ3) − (b +2 d)(b − 1)δ1 +( b − 1)(5b − 6d)δ3
+ b2
(b − 2d) {(b − 10)δ1 − 6δ2 +3 (b − 2)δ3}
= −{b(b − 10) + 2d(b +2 )}δ1 +2 ( 3b − 2d)δ2 + {b(5b − 2) − 2d(3b − 2)}δ3
+ b2
(b − 2d) {(b − 10)δ1 − 6δ2 +3 (b − 2)δ3}
Thus,
−16(b − 1)(b − 2d)2ΘS = {b2(b − 10) − b(b − 2d)(b − 10) − 2d(b − 2d)(b +2 )}δ1
+ {2(3b − 2d)(b − 2d) − 6b2}δ2
+ {b(5b − 2)(b − 2d) − 2d(3b − 2)(b − 2d)+3 b2(b − 2)}δ3
= −4d{6b − d(b +2 )}δ1 +8 d(d − 2b)δ2 +4 {2b2(b − 1)
− 2bd(2b − 1) +d2(3b − 2)}δ3
70

By the same logic as above,
Proposition : Θ= 1
4(b−1)(b−2d)2
(
d{6b − d(b +2 )}D1 − 2d(d − 2b)D2 −{ 2b2(b − 1) −
2bd(2b − 1) +d2(3b − 2)}D3
)
§7.11. Let E = p∗L.T h e nE is a vector bundle of rank d +1 − g on S. Noting by
Riemann-Roch that π∗OP (1) has degree zero, we see that it follows from the deﬁnitions
that (d +1 − g)γS =2 N,w h e r eN = deg (E). Let κ = c1(ωX/S), μ = c1(L). By
Riemann-Roch,
N = Td(−κ) ch(μ)=( 1 − κ
2 + κ2
12)(1 +μ+ 1
2μ2)
= κ2
12 + μ2
2 − κμ
2
In our language, then,
24N =2 (ωX/S)2 +3 (f ∗ ωP/S )2 +6 ωX/S · (f ∗ ωP/S )
=2 (ωX/S)2 +9 (f ∗ ωP/S )2 +6 R · (f ∗ ωP/S )
Hence,
24(b − 1)N =( b − 10)δ1 − 6δ2 +3 (b − 2)δ3 + {36δ3 − 12δ3 − 12l}(b − 1)
=( b − 10)δ1 − 6δ2 +3 {(b − 2) + 8(b − 1)}δ3 − 6(3δ1 +2 δ2 + δ3)
=( b − 28)δ1 − 18δ2 +9 ( 3b − 4)δ3
Thus we have the following:
Proposition : γ = 1
6(b−1)(4d−b) {(b − 28)D1 − 18D2 +9 ( 3b − 4)D3}
§7.12. Remark : This completes our calculation. As remarked previously, we can
check our calculation by making sure that the expressions for λ and Θ go to zero, while
that for γ goes to one under the map: D1 ↦→ 3(b − d), D2 ↦→ b
2 (b − 10) + 4d, D3 ↦→ d.
§7.13. We are now in a position to complete the proof of Theorem 6 of§6, and hence of
its consequences, ﬁrst mentioned in §4, and restated in §6.7. We wish to show thatD1, D2,
and D3 are linearly independent in the Picard group ofG. But from the relations obtained
already in this Section, we see that theQ-linear subspace generated by the excess divisors
already contains a basis for the whole space. The result thus follows immediately.
71

§8. Arithmetic Applications
§8.1. In this Section, we make suggestions about possible applications of the material
discussed up till now to giving
(1) An alternate proof of the Shafarevich conjecture
(2) An eﬀective version of the Mordell conjecture in the style of [30].
In particular, we expose a certain kind of argument discovered by the author that allows
one to conclude the above arithmetic results by using the geometry of the compactiﬁcation
of the Hurwitz scheme. The argument to be exposed, however, has a couple of gaps that
the author has not been able to ﬁll in. We state the facts necessary to ﬁll in these gaps
as “Wishes,” in the hope that perhaps some reader will see how to prove them, thus
completing the proposed proofs of the above arithmetic results.
Let B = Spec O
F ,w h e r eOF is the ring of integers of a number ﬁeldF.L e tf : C → B
be a smooth curve of genus g ≥ 3. (We assume good reduction to simplify the discussion,
since this case already illustrates the essential problem involved.)
§8.2. If f is hyperelliptic (i.e., the geometric ﬁbres of f are hyperelliptic), then we can
canonically write f as a double covering ofP1
B,s ot h a tt oe v e r ys u c hf we can canonically
assign (up to automorphisms of P1
B) a certain number of points of P1
B which are distinct
from each other outside primes over 2. We can then conclude the “Shafarevich conjecture”
for such hyperelliptic curves, i.e., that only a ﬁnite number of such curves exist overB,b y
applying Siegel’s theorem on integral points.
If f is not hyperelliptic, then no such canonical presentation as a double covering
exists. Generically, that is, over F, we can write f as a Hurwitz covering of P
1
F , but
then the problem is that we can’t apply Siegel’s theorem unless we know that the points
of ramiﬁcation remain distinct, not only generically, but at all primes outside some ﬁxed
ﬁnite set. Thus it is natural to study in detail degenerations of Hurwitz coverings, i.e., the
compactiﬁcation of the Hurwitz scheme, to see if one can get around this problem. This
was the original motivation for this paper.
§8.3. We can add some canonicality to the situation if we insist that we only consider
coverings f : C
F → P1
F such that f ∗ O(1) = ω⊗N
CF /F ,w h e r eN is some ﬁxed integer. If we
let σ : Mg →J Nχ be the section corresponding to ω⊗N
CF /F ,a n dl e tK be such that the
following diagram is Cartesian:
K
τ
−→ G
⏐⏐↓ρ
⏐⏐↓
Mg
σ
−→ J Nχ
72

then ideally, we would like a section ζof ρ that avoids the Ei = τ∗ Di,f o ri =1 ,2,3. This
is unrealistic, however. In fact, even constructing any section ζ at all is rather diﬃcult.
At the other extreme, if we assume that the height (e.g.[10]) of our curve is bounded,
then everything becomes trivial. Indeed, if we ﬁx an appropriate metric on K so as to
give it an “integral structure” over the “compact curve”Spec OF
⋃ S∞ (where S∞ =t h e
archimedean places), then we see that if c : B →M g is the classifying map of our curve,
then the number of possibilities for the Grassmann bundle c∗K is bounded as soon as
degAr (c∗λ)( w h e r e“degAr ” means the degree of the arithmetic line bundle) is bounded,
by the following result of Faltings:
Lemma : The number of closed subvarieties V ⊆ PM
B (where M is any positive integer),
with π : V → B ﬂat, of degree d (∈ N) as a subvariety over F of PM
F , of relative dimension
n over B, and of height degAr (π∗[O(1)]n+1) ≤ M ′ (for some ﬁxed M ′ ∈ R) is ﬁnite.
Proof: (Sketch) The Lemma is obvious for hypersurfaces. But then one can easily reduce
to the case of hypersurfaces via the method of the Chow variety. ⃝
(Here we apply the Lemma by using the Pl¨ucker embedding for c∗K and note that
degAr c∗(ρ∗[γ]N+1) ≤ Kd e gAr (c∗λ)
for some ﬁxed K (independent of c) and for N = relative dimension of ρ). Similarly, since
the total number of possibilities for the entire situation is ﬁnite, we can certainly ﬁnd some
ﬁnite set S of primes of B such that we can always write curves C with bounded height
as Hurwitz coverings over B − S. (In fact, the Lemma also shows that the number of
possibilities for C is, in this case, also ﬁnite!).
§8.4. The problem, then, is to ﬁnd an intermediate course. First, we must bound the
number of possibilities for the Grassmann bundlec
∗K without bounding degAr (c∗λ). If the
Grassmann bundle is associated to a vector bundleE which is “suﬃciently indecomposable”
in the sense that it is parametrized by some sort of ﬁnite “cohomology group” on the
compactiﬁed curve Spec O
F
⋃S∞ (cf. the well-known situation for indecomposable vector
bundles of rank 2 on curves over a ﬁnite ﬁeld), then the number of possibilities forc∗K will
be ﬁnite. At present, however, the author does not know how to prove this sort of result,
so we merely state it as a “wish:”
Wish 1: The number of possibilities for c
∗K (as a Grassmann bundle) is ﬁnite.
Moreover, in order to be able to prove the Shafarevich conjecture as in the hyperelliptic
case, we also need the following result:
Wish 2 : Let F be a number ﬁeld, with ring of integers OF .L e t G→ Spec OF be a
Grassmann bundle with integral structure at inﬁnity. Let r ∈ N, d1,...,d r ∈ N. Fix a
ﬁnite set of closed primes S ⊆ Spec OF . Then there exists a ﬁnite set of closed primes
(S ⊆)T ⊆ Spec OF with the following property:
(∗) Let D1,..., Dr ⊆G be ﬂat divisors over Spec OF with Di of degree di
for all i =1 ,...,r that are geometrically integral and distinct outside
73

S. Then there exists a section σ : Spec OF →G that avoids D1,..., Dr
outside T .
The result is known to be true in the following cases:
(1) If G is a P1-bundle, then it follows from Siegel’s theorem on integral
points.
(2) If G is a P2-bundle, then if we assume that the Di are not only ge-
ometrically integral, but smooth, then it follows from the Shafarevich
conjecture applied to smooth plane curves.
In both these cases, however, one should note that Siegel’s theorem and the Shafarevich
conjecture are somewhat stronger than Wish 2, and so using them to prove Wish 2 is sort
of overkill. At this point, the author knows of no way to prove Wish 2 in any generality,
but if a proof could be given for Wish 1 and Wish 2, then one could prove the Shafarevich
conjecture using the technique of Hurwitz coverings.
In closing we remark that since the Shafarevich conjecture is, in fact, known [10], the
number of possibilities for f : C → B is, in fact, ﬁnite, so we can, indeed, ﬁnd a ﬁxed,
ﬁnite set of primes T which is independent ofF and such that we can write anyf : C → B
as a Hurwitz covering outside S. Thus, we see that something like Wish 1 and Wish 2
must be true, but to approach things in this way is to defeat the purpose of this venture!
§8.5. We now move on to motivating the possible application to an eﬀective form of
the Mordell conjecture. In §7, we computed the coeﬃcients of λ in terms of the D
i and
found that the coeﬃcients for D1 and D3 were positive, while that for D2 was negative.
Suppose, however, just for the moment that all three coeﬃcients werepositive. Then, since
the Di are all eﬀective(i.e., in the sense of divisors, not in the sense of an “eﬀective” form
of the Mordell conjecture), there would exist a constant K ∈ N such that the inequality
(∗1)Θ ≤ Kλ
w o u l dh o l do nG. Now suppose that our curve f : C → B is ﬁxed and that we have a ﬁxed
line bundle L on C of relative degree d − 1 for some large d. Then we have a diagram:
C
α
−→ J d
⏐⏐
↓
f
⏐
⏐
↓
B
c
−→ M g
where α is deﬁned on an S-section τ : S → CS by associating to τ the line bundle L(τ)
(where τis regarded as a relative divisor) of relative degreed on CS.N o wα∗Θ is relatively
74

ample on C and hence deﬁnes a height hΘ (−) on rational points. Now if we pull back the
Grassmann bundle α∗(G→J ) to a bundle overC, this Grassmann bundle, which a priori
is locally trivial only in the ´etale topology, will, in fact, be locally trivial for the Zariski
topology; thus, if we are given a section σ of f, and pull-back this Grassmann bundle
further via σ to a Grassmann bundle overB, this bundle overB will always have a section
over B. Thus we can pull back the relation (∗1) via α ◦σ to obtain:
(∗2) hΘ (σ) ≤ KdegAr (c∗λ)
Moreover, this holds (with the same K)o v e ra n yn u m b e rﬁ e l dF and thus gives us a
relation of the same type (only stronger) as that conjectured by Vojta [24], Appendix, §5,
p. 176. In particular, it implies the Mordell conjecture.
§8.6. In fact, however, (∗2) is too strong and it is easy to see that it cannot hold. This
is not surprising considering that after all, we derived it using the incorrect assumption
that the coeﬃcient of D
2 for λ is positive. To form a reasonable conjectural inequality like
(∗2), one must somehow involve the discriminant of the base ﬁeld. Thus, Vojta conjectures:
(∗3) hΘ (σ) ≤ K1 discF/Q + K2
where K1 and K2 are constants independent of F,a n ddiscF/Q is the “logarithmic dis-
criminant” ofloc. cit..
On the other hand, althought the derivation of §8.5 is incorrect, it is very tempting,
since it “almost” works in the following metamathematical sense: only the coeﬃcient ofD2
is negative, and, moreover, sinced, hence b, is taken to be very large, the absolute value of
the coeﬃcient of D2 is much smaller than those of the other, positive coeﬃcients. One is,
thus, tempted to conjecture that if we writeGσ for the Grassmann bundle σ∗ α∗(G→J d)
over B,a n dDi,σ for the various pull-backs of the Di’s to divisors of Gσ,t h e nw eh a v et h e
following:
Wish 3: For ﬁxed F , we can choose a section τ : B →G σ such that degAr (τ∗D2,σ) is
bounded independent of σ.
as well as:
Wish 4 : For variable F , there exist K
1,K2 ∈ N such that for any σ over any F ,t h e r e
exists a section τ : B →G σ such that degAr (τ∗D2,σ) ≤ K1 discF/Q + K2 (so K1 and K2
are independent of σ and F ).
Thus, combined with the reasoning of §8.5, Wish 3 would imply the ordinary Mordell
conjecture, while Wish 4 would imply Vojta’s generalization ( ∗3) of that conjecture. It
seems that Wish 3 and Wish 4 might not necessarily be easier to prove than the more
natural statements that they are alleged to imply, but it is hoped that they might provide
an interesting new perspective on the problem.
75

Bibliography
[1] E. Arbarello and M. Cornalba, The Picard Groups of the Moduli Space of Curves,
Topology, 26 (1987), pp. 153-171.
[2] E. Arbarello, Weierstrass Points and the Moduli of Curves, Compositio Math., 29
(1974), pp. 325-342.
[3] M. Artin, Algebrization of Formal Moduli, I, Global Analysis (Papers in Honor of K.
Kodaira), University of Tokyo Press, 1969, pp. 21-71.
[4] A. Clebsch, Z¨ur Theorie der Riemann’schen Fl¨ache, Math. Ann., 6 (1872), pp. 216-230.
[5] A. Grothendieck, G´eometrie Formelle et G´eometrie Alg´ebrique, S´eminaire Bourbaki
182.
[6] S. Diaz and R. Donagi, Hurwitz Surfaces with Nontrivial Divisors,Algebraic Geometry,
Sundance 1988, Contemp. Math. 116, Amer. Math. Soc., 1991, pp. 1-8.
[7] S. Diaz, R. Donagi, and D. Harbater, Every Curve is a Hurwitz Space,Duke J. Math.,
59 (1989), pp. 737-746.
[8] P. Deligne and D. Mumford, The Irreducibility of the Space of Curves of Given Genus,
Institute des Hautes Etudes Scientiﬁques Publications Math´ematiques, 36 (1969), pp.
75-109.
[9] A. Grothendieck and J. Dieudonn´e, Etude Locale des sch´emas et des morphismes de
sch´emas, Publ. Math. IHES 20 (1964), 24 (1965), 28 (1966), 32 (1967).
[10] G. Faltings, Endlichkeitss¨atze f¨ur Abelschen Variet¨aten ¨uber Zahlk¨orpern, Inv. Math.,
73 (1983), pp. 349-366.
[11] G. Faltings and C. L. Chai,Degenerations of Abelian Varieties, Springer-Verlag, 1990,
Chapter 1.
[12] A. Grothendieck, Fondements de la G´eometrie Alg´ebrique,S ´eminaire Bourbaki 1957-
62, Secr´etariat Math., Paris, 1962.
[13] W. Fulton, Hurwitz Schemes and the Irreducibility of Moduli of Algebraic Curves,
Annals of Math., 90 (1969), pp. 542-575.
[14] P. Griﬃths and J. Harris, Algebraic Geometry, Wiley-Interscience, 1978, pp. 193-211.
[15] J. Girard, Cohomologie non ab´elienne, Springer-Verlag, 1971.
[16] J. Harer, The Second Homology Group of the Mapping Class Group of an Orientable
Surface, Inv. Math., 72 (1982), pp. 221-239.
[17] J. Harer, The Cohomology of the Moduli Space of Curves, Theory of Moduli (Monte-
catini Terme, 1985), E. Sernesi (Ed.), Lecture Notes in Mathematics1337, Springer-
Verlag, 1988.
76

[18] J. Harris and S. Diaz, The Geometry of the Severi Variety II: Independence of Divisor
Classes and Examples, Algebraic Geometry (Sundance, UT, 1986), Lecture Notes in
Mathematics 1311, Springer-Verlag, 1988, pp. 23-50.
[19] J. Harris and D. Mumford, On the Kodaira Dimension of the Moduli Space of Curves,
Inv. Math., 67 (1982), pp. 23-86.
[20] A. Hurwitz, ¨Uber Riemann’schen Fl¨ache mit gegebenen Verzweigungs-punkten,Math.
Ann., 39 (1891), pp. 1-61.
[21] K. Kato, Logarithmic Structures of Fontaine-Illusie, Proceedings of the First JAMI
Conference, Johns-Hopkins University Press, 1990, pp. 191-224.
[22] F. F. Knudsen, The Projectivity of the Moduli Space of Stable Curves, II: The Stacks
Mg,n, Math. Scand., 52 (1983), pp. 161-199.
[23] F. F. Knudsen, The Projectivity of the Moduli Space of Stable Curves, III: The Line
Bundles on Mg,n, and a Proof of the Projectivity of Mg,n in Characteristic 0, Math.
Scand., 52 (1983), pp. 200-212.
[24] S. Lang, Introduction to Arakelov Theory, Springer-Verlag, 1988, Appendix by Vojta.
[25] J. L¨uroth, ¨Uber Verzweigungsschnitte und Querschnitte in einer Riemannschen Fl¨a-
che, Math. Ann, 4 (1871), pp. 181-184.
[26] L. Moret-Bailly, Expos´eI Ii n S´eminaire sur Les Pinceaux Arithm´etiques: La Conjec-
ture de Mordell, edited by L. Szpiro, Ast´erisque 127, 1985.
[27] W. Fulton, On the Irreducibility of the Moduli Space of Curves,Inv. Math., 67 (1982),
pp.87-88.
[28] J. S. Milne, ´Etale Cohomology, Princeton University Press, 1980.
[29] A. Grothendieck et al., Revˆetements ´etales et Groupe Fondamental, Lecture Notes in
Mathematics 224, Springer-Verlag, 1971.
[30] P. Vojta, Diophantine Approximations and Value Distribution Theory, Lecture Notes
in Mathematics 1239, Springer-Verlag, 1987.
77