The Proﬁnite Grothendieck Conjecture for Closed
Hyperbolic Curves over Number Fields
by Shinichi Mochizuki
Section 0: Introduction
In [Tama], a proof of the Grothendieck Conjecture (reviewed below) was given for
smooth aﬃne hyperbolic curves over ﬁnite ﬁelds (and over number ﬁelds). The purpose
of this paper is to show how one can derive the Grothendieck Conjecture for arbitrary
(i.e., not necessarily aﬃne) smooth hyperbolic curves over number ﬁelds from the results
of [Tama] for aﬃne hyperbolic curves over ﬁnite ﬁelds.
We obtain three types of results: one over number ﬁelds, one over ﬁnite ﬁelds, and
one over local ﬁelds. We remark here that when this paper was ﬁrst written (October
1995), Theorems A and C below were the strongest known results of their respective kinds.
Since then, the author wrote [Mzk2] (November 1995), which gives rise to much stronger
results than Theorems A or C of the present paper. Moreover, the proofs of [Mzk2] are
completely diﬀerent from (and, in particular, do not rely on) the proofs of the present
paper. Nevertheless, it seems to the author that the present paper still has some marginal
interest, partly because most of the present paper is devoted to the proof of Theorem B
below (which isnot implied by any result of [Mzk2]), and partly because it is in some sense
of interest to see how Theorems A or C can be derived within the context of the theory of
[Tama].
Our main result over number ﬁelds (Theorem 10.2 in the text) is as follows:
Theorem A: Let K be a ﬁnite extension of Q;l e t
K be an algebraic closure of K.L e t
XK → Spec(K) and X′
K → Spec(K) be smooth, geometrically connected, proper curves
over K,o fg e n u s≥ 2.L e tΔ XK (respectively, Δ X′
K
) be the geometric fundamental group
of XK (respectively, X′
K). Then the natural map
IsomK(XK,X ′
K) → Outρ(Δ XK ,Δ X′
K
)
is bijective. Here, “ Outρ” refers to outer isomorphisms that respect the natural outer
representations of Gal(
K/K) on Δ XK and Δ X′
K
.
The statement of this Theorem is commonly referred to as “the Grothendieck Conjecture.”
In [Tama], a theorem similar to Theorem A, except that X is replaced by a hyperbolic
aﬃne curve, is proven. It is a simple exercise to derive the aﬃne case from the proper
1

case. On the other hand, to derive the proper case from the aﬃne case is by no means
straightforward; in this paper, we derive the proper case overnumber ﬁelds from the aﬃne
case over ﬁnite ﬁelds .
In fact, to be more precise, we shall derive the proper case over number ﬁelds from
a certain “logarithmic Grothendieck Conjecture” for singular (proper) stable curves over
ﬁnite ﬁelds. This “logarithmic Grothendieck conjecture,” which is our main result over
ﬁnite ﬁelds (Theorem 7.4), is as follows:
Theorem B: Let S
log be a log scheme such that S is the spectrum of a ﬁnite ﬁeld k,
and the log structure is isomorphic to the one associated to the chart N → k given by
the zero map. Let Xlog → Slog and (X′)log → Slog be stable log-curves such that at least
one of X or X′ is not smooth over k.L e tΔ Xlog (respectively, Δ(X ′)log ) be the geometric
fundamental group of Xlog (respectively, (X′)log) obtained by considering log admissible
coverings of Xlog (respectively, (X′)log) (as in [Mzk], §3). Then the natural map
IsomSlog (Xlog,(X′)log) → OutD
ρ (Δ Xlog ,Δ(X ′)log )
is bijective. Here, the “ D” stands for “degree one (outer isomorphisms).”
This Theorem is derived directly from Tamagawa’s results on aﬃne hyperbolic curves over
ﬁnite ﬁelds. Its proof occupies the bulk of the present paper.
Finally, by supplementing Theorem B with various arguments concerning the funda-
mental groups of curves over local ﬁelds, we obtain the following local result (Theorem
9.8):
Theorem C: Let K be a ﬁnite extension of Q
p;l e tA ⊆ K be its ring of integers; and let
k be its residue ﬁeld. Let XK be a smooth, geometrically connected, proper curve of genus
g ≥ 2 over K. Assume that XK admits a stable extension X → Spec(A) such that the
abelian variety portion of Pic0(Xk) (where Xk = X ⊗A k)i s ordinary. Then the natural
outer representation
ρX :Γ K → Out(Δ XK )
of the absolute Galois group of K on the geometric fundamental group of XK completely
determines the isomorphism class of XK.
Even though this is a rather weak version of the Grothendieck Conjecture (compared to
the results we obtain over ﬁnite and global ﬁelds), this sort of result is interesting in the
sense that it shows that curves behave somewhat diﬀerently from abelian varieties (cf. the
Remark following Theorem 9.8).
2

Now we discuss the contents of the paper in more detail. Sections 1 through 7 are
devoted to deriving Theorem B from the results of [Tama]. In Section 1, we show how to
recover the set of irreducible components of a stable curve from its fundamental group. In
Section 2, we review various facts from [Mzk] concerning log admissible coverings, and show
how one can deﬁne an “admissible fundamental group” of a stable log-curve. In Section
3, we show how one can group-theoretically characterize the quotient of the admissible
fundamental group corresponding to ´etale coverings. In Section 4, we show that the tame
fundamental group of each connected component of the smooth locus of a stable log-curve
is contained inside the admissible fundamental group of the stable log-curve. In Section
5, we show how to recover the set of nodes (including the information of which irreducible
components each node sits on) of a stable log-curve from its admissible fundamental group.
In Section 6, we show how the log structure at a node of a stable log-curve can be recovered
from the admissible fundamental group of the stable log-curve. In Section 7, we put all
of this information together and show how one can derive Theorem B from the results of
[Tama].
In Sections 8 and 9, we shift from studying curves over ﬁnite ﬁelds to studying curves
over local ﬁelds. In order to do this, it is necessary ﬁrst to characterize (group-theoretically)
the quotient of the (characteristic zero) geometric fundamental group of a curve over a local
ﬁeld which corresponds to admissible coverings. This is done in Section 8. In Section 9,
we ﬁrst show (Lemma 9.1) that the degree of an isomorphism between the arithmetic
fundamental groups of two curves over a local ﬁeld is necessarily one. This is important
because one cannot apply Theorem 7.4 to an arbitrary isomorphism of fundamental groups:
one needs to know ﬁrst that the degree is equal to one. Then, by means of a certain trick
which allows one to reduce the study of curves over local ﬁelds with smooth reduction to
the study of curves over local ﬁelds with singular reduction, we show (Theorem 9.2) that
one can recover the reduction (over the residue ﬁeld) of a given smooth, proper, hyperbolic
curve over a local ﬁeld group-theoretically. The rest of Section 9 is devoted to curves with
ordinary reduction, culminating in the proof of Theorem C. Finally, in Section 10, we
observe that Theorem A follows formally from Theorem 9.2.
The author would like to thank A. Tamagawa for numerous fruitful discussions con-
cerning the contents of [Tama], as well as the present paper. In some sense, the present
paper is something of a long appendix to [Tama]: That is to say, several months after the
author learned of the results of [Tama], it dawned upon the author that by using admissible
coverings, Theorem A follows “trivially” from the results of [Tama]. On the other hand,
since many people around the author were not so familiar with admissible coverings or log
structures, it seemed to the author that it might be useful to write out a detailed version
of this “trivial argument.” The result is the present paper.
Finally, the author would also like to thank Prof. Y. Ihara for his encouragement and
advice during the preparation of this paper.
3

Section 1: The Set of Irreducible Components
Let k be the ﬁnite ﬁeld of q = pf . Fix an algebraic closure
 k of k.L e t Γ b e t h e
absolute Galois group of k.L e tX → Spec(k) be a morphism of schemes.
Deﬁnition 1.1: We shall callX a multi-stable curve of genusg if dimk(H1(X, OX)) = g,
and X
k
def
= X ⊗k
 k is a ﬁnite disjoint union of stable curves over
 k of genus ≥ 2.I f X is
multi-stable, then we shall callX sturdy if every irreducible component of the normalization
of X
k has genus ≥ 2.
Thus, in particular, a curve is stable if and only if it is geometrically connected and multi-
stable. Moreover, a ﬁnite ´ etale covering of a multi-stable (respectively, sturdy) curve is
multi-stable (respectively, sturdy).
Suppose that X is stable of genus g ≥ 2. Fix a base-point x ∈ X(k). Then we
may form the (algebraic) fundamental group Π
def
= π1(X,x
k)o f X.L e t X
k
def
= X ⊗k
 k;
Δ
def
= π1(X
k,x
k). Then we have a natural exact sequence of groups
1 → Δ → Π → Γ → 1
induced by the structure morphism X → Spec(k).
The purpose of this Section is to show how the set of irreducible components of X
can be canonically recovered from the morphism Π → Γ. Fix a prime l diﬀerent from p.
Let us consider the ´etale cohomology group He def
= H1
´et(X
k, Zl). Let ψ : ˜X → X be the
normalization of X. Then we can also consider Hn def
= H1
´et( ˜X
k, Zl). By considering the
long exact cohomology sequence in ´etale cohomology associated to
0 → Zl → ψ∗ψ∗Zl → (ψ∗ψ∗Zl)/Zl → 0
we obtain a surjection He → Hn.L e tu sw r i t eHc for the kernel of this surjection. (Here,
“ e” (respectively, “n”; “c”) stands for ´etale (respectively, normalization; combinatorial).)
Note that Hc is a free Zl-module of rank NX − IX +1 ,w h e r eNX (respectively, IX)i s
the number nodes (respectively, irreducible components) of X
k.M o r e o v e r ,Hn is a free
Zl-module of rank equal to twice the sum of the genera of the connected components of
˜X
k.
Thus, we obtain a natural exact sequence of Γ-modules
0 → Hc → He → Hn → 0
Let φ ∈ Γ be the automorphism of
 k given by raising to the qth power. Then one sees
easily that some ﬁnite power of φ acts trivially on Hc. On the other hand, by the Weil
4

conjectures (applied to the various geometric connected components of ˜X), no power of φ
acts with eigenvalue 1 on Hn. We thus obtain the following
Proposition 1.2: The natural exact sequence 0 → Hc → He → Hn → 0 can be
recovered entirely from Π → Γ.
Proof: Indeed, He = Hom(Δ , Zl), while Hc can be recovered by looking at the maximal
Zl-submodule of He on which some power of φ ∈ Γ acts trivially. ⃝
Let Le = He ⊗ Fl; Lc = Hc ⊗ Fl; Ln = Hn ⊗ Fl.T h u s ,Le = H1
´et(X
k, Fl), and we
have an exact sequence of Γ-modules
0 → Lc → Le → Ln → 0
Moreover, elements of Le correspond to ´etale, abelian coverings of X
k of degree l.L e t
L∗ ⊆ Le be the subset of elements whose image in Ln is nonzero.
Suppose thatα ∈ L∗.L e tYα → X
k be the corresponding covering. ThenNYα = l·NX.
Thus, we obtain a morphism ϵ : L∗ → Z that maps α ↦→ IYα .S i n c eL∗ is a ﬁnite set,
the image of ϵ is ﬁnite. Let M ⊆ L∗ be the subset of elements α on which ϵ attains its
maximum. Let us deﬁne a pre-equivalence relation “ ∼”o nM as follows:
If α, β ∈ M,t h e nw ew r i t eα ∼ β if, for every λ, μ ∈ F×
l for which
λ · α + μ · β ∈ L∗,w eh a v eλ · α + μ · β ∈ M.
Now we have the following result:
Proposition 1.3: Suppose that X is stable and sturdy .T h e n “ ∼” is, in fact, an
equivalence relation, and moreover, CX
def
= M/ ∼ is naturally isomorphic to the set of
irreducible components of X
k.
Proof: First, let us observe, that IYα is maximal (equal to l(IX − 1) + 1) if and only if
there exists a unique irreducible component Zα of ˜X
k over which the coveringYα → X
k is
nontrivial. Now, if Z is a connected component of ˜X
k,l e tLZ
def
= H1
´et(Z, Fl). Thus,
Ln =
⨁
Z
LZ
where the direct sum is over the connected components of˜X
k. Then it follows immediately
from the deﬁnitions that M consists precisely of those elements α ∈ L∗ whose image in
Ln has (relative to the above direct sum decomposition) exactly one nonzero component
5

(namely, in LZα ). Moreover, α ∼ β is equivalent to Zα = Zβ. Finally, that every Z
appears as a Zα follows from the sturdiness assumption. This completes the proof. ⃝
Remark: Note that although at ﬁrst glance the set CX = M/ ∼ appears to depend on the
choice of prime l, it is not diﬃcult to see that in fact, if one chooses another prime l,a n d
hence obtains a resulting C′
X = M′/ ∼′, one obtains a natural isomorphism CX ∼= C′
X
(compatible with the isomorphisms just obtained of CX and C′
X to the set of irreducible
components of X
k) as follows: If α ∈ M and α′ ∈ M′, let us consider the product
Yαα ′ = Yα ×X Y ′
α. Thus, we have a cyclic ´etale covering Yαα ′ → X of degree l · l′.T h e n
one checks easily that α and α′ correspond to the same irreducible component if and only
if (Yαα ′ )
k has precisely l · l′(IX − 1) + 1 irreducible components.
Proposition 1.4: Suppose that X is stable and sturdy. Then the set of irreducible
components of X
k (together with its natural Γ-action) can be recovered entirely from
Π → Γ.
Proof: Indeed, it follows from Proposition 1.2 that L∗ can be recovered from Π → Γ.
Moreover, we claim that M can be recovered, as well. Indeed, the maximality of IYα is
equivalent to the minimality of NYα − IYα +1= l · NX − IYα + 1, which is equal to the
dimension over Fl of the “Lc”o fY . Once one has M, it follows that one can also recover
“ ∼,” hence by Proposition 1.3, one can recover the set of irreducible components of X
k.
Finally, by the above Remark, the set that one recovers is independent of the choice of l.
⃝
Corollary 1.5: Suppose that X is stable and sturdy. Let H ⊆ Π be an open subgroup.
Let YH → X be the corresponding ´etale covering. Then the set of irreducible components
of YH can be recovered from Π → Γ and H.
Proof: Let k′ be the (ﬁnite) extension of k which is the subﬁeld of
 k stabilized by the
image of H in Γ. Then YH is geometrically connected, hence stable and sturdy over k′.
Thus, we reduce to the case H =Π , YH = X. But then the set of irreducible components
of X is the set of Γ-orbits of the set of irreducible components ofX
k. Thus, the Corollary
follows from Proposition 1.4. ⃝
Looking back over what we have done, one sees that in fact, we have proven a stronger
result that what is stated in Corollary 1.5. Indeed, ﬁx an irreducible component I ⊆ X.
Then let Jl(I) be the set of
 k-valued l-torsion points of the Jacobian of the normalization
of I
k. Then not only have we recovered set of all irreducible components I,w eh a v ea l s o
recovered, for each I, the set Jl(I) (with its natural Frobenius action). We state this as a
Corollary:
6

Corollary 1.6: Suppose that X is stable and sturdy, and l is a prime number diﬀerent
from p. Then for each irreducible component I of X, the set Jl(I) (with its natural
Frobenius action) can be recovered naturally from Π → Γ.
Section 2: The Admissible F undamental Group
Let r and g be nonnegative integers such that 2g − 2+ r ≥ 1. If (C→
 Mg,r;σ1,...,σ r :
Mg,r →C ) is the universalr-pointed stable curve of genusg over the moduli stack, thenC
and
 Mg,r have natural log structures deﬁned by the respective divisors at inﬁnity and the
images of the σi. Denote the resulting log morphism by Clog →
 M
log
g,r .L e tX → S be the
underlying curve associated to anr-pointed stable curve of genusg over a schemeS (where
S is the underlying scheme of some log schemeSlog). Suppose that X is equipped with the
log structure (call the resulting log scheme Xlog) obtained by pulling back Clog →
 M
log
g,r
via some log morphism Slog →
 M
log
g,r whose underlying non-log morphism S →
 Mg,r is
the classifying morphism of X (equipped with its marked points). In this case, we shall
call Xlog → Slog an r-pointed stable log-curve of genus g. Similarly, we have r-pointed
multistable log-curves of genus g:t h a t i s ,Xlog → Slog such that over some ﬁnite ´etale
covering S′ → S, Xlog ×S S′ becomes a ﬁnite union of stable pointed log-curves.
Let k be as in the preceding section. LetSlog be a log scheme whose underlying scheme
is Spec(k) and whose log structure is (noncanonically!) isomorphic to the log structure
associated to the morphism N → k,w h e r e1∈ N ↦→ 0 ∈ k.L e t Xlog → Slog be a stable
log-curve of genus g ≥ 2.
Next, we would like to consider liftings of Xlog → Slog.L e tA be a complete discrete
valuation ring which is ﬁnite over Zp and has residue ﬁeld equal to k.L e t Tlog be a log
scheme whose underlying scheme isSpec(A) and whose log structure is that deﬁned by the
special point S = Spec(k) ⊆ T. Also, let us assume that Slog is equal to the restriction of
the log structure of Tlog to S = Spec(k) ⊆ T.L e t Y log → Tlog be a stable log-curve of
genus g whose restriction toSlog is Xlog → Slog. In this case, we shall say thatY log → Tlog
lifts Xlog → Slog. It is well-known (from the log-smoothness of the moduli stack of stable
curves equipped with its natural log structure) that such log-curves Y log → Tlog always
exist.
Next, we would like to consider log admissible coverings
Zlog → Y log
of Y log. We refer to [Mzk], §3.5, for the rather lengthy and technical deﬁnition and ﬁrst
properties of such coverings. It follows in particular from the deﬁnition that Z is a stable
curve overT. In fact, (as is shown in [Mzk], Proposition 3.11), one can deﬁne such coverings
without referring to log structures. That is, there is a notion of an admissible covering
([Mzk]. §3.9) Z → Y (which can be deﬁned without using log structures). Moreover,
Z → Y is admissible if and only if Z admits a log structure such that Zlog → Y log is log
7

admissible. In [Mzk], we dealt strictly with the case where Z is geometrically connected
over T. Here, we shall call Z → Y multi-admissible if Z is a disjoint union of connected
components Zi such that each Zi → Y is admissible.
Let ηbe the generic point of T.L e tYη = Y ×T η.I f Z → Y is multi-admissible, then
it will always be the case that the restrictionZη → Yη of this covering to the generic ﬁber
is ﬁnite ´etale. Now suppose that ψη : Zη → Yη is a ﬁnite ´etale covering. If ψη extends to
an multi-admissible covering Z → Y , then this extension is unique ([Mzk], §3.13).
Deﬁnition 2.1: We shall call ψη pre-admissible if it extends to an multi-admissible
covering ψ : Z → Y . We shall callψη potentially pre-admissibleif it becomes pre-admissible
after a tamely ramiﬁed base-change (i.e., replacing A by a tamely ramiﬁed extension of
A).
Thus, in particular, if A′ is a tamely ramiﬁed extension of A,t h e nYη ⊗A A′ → Yη is
potentially pre-admissible. If ψη is potentially pre-admissible and Zη is geometrically
connected over η, then it is pre-admissible if and only if Zη has stable reduction over A.
Lemma 2.2 : Suppose that Zη → Yη and Z′
η → Yη are pre-admissible. Let Z′′
η
def
=
Zη ×Yη Z′
η.T h e nZ′′
η → Yη is pre-admissible.
Proof: Let Z → Y and Z′ → Y be the respective multi-admissible extensions. Let Z′′
be the normalization of Y in Z′′
η. Thus, we have a natural morphismZ′′ → Z ×Y Z′ which
is an isomorphism at height one primes. In particular, Z′′ is ´etale over Y at all height one
primes. It thus follows from Lemma 3.12 of [Mzk] that Z′′ → Y is multi-admissible. ⃝
Lemma 2.3 : Suppose that Zη → Yη is pre-admissible, and that Zη → Yη factors
through ﬁnite ´etale surjections Zη → Z′
η and Z′
η → Yη.T h e nZ′
η → Yη is pre-admissible.
Proof: Similar to that of Lemma 2.2. ⃝
Let K be the quotient ﬁeld of A. Fix an algebraic closure
 K of K. Suppose that Y
is equipped with a base-point y ∈ Y (A) such that the corresponding morphism T → Y
avoids the nodes of the special ﬁber of Y .W r i t e ΠY for π1(YK,y
K). Thus, we have a
natural surjection ΠY → Gal(
K/K), whose kernel is a group ΔY ⊆ ΠY .
Deﬁnition 2.4: We shall call an open subgroup H ⊆ ΠY co-admissible if the corre-
sponding ﬁnite ´etale covering Zη → Yη is potentially pre-admissible. Let Πadm
Y be the
quotient of ΠY by the intersection ⋂ H of all co-admissible H ⊆ ΠY .
8

Remark: The admissible fundamental group Π adm
Y has already been deﬁned and studied
by K. Fujiwara ([Fuji]). Moreover, the author learned much about Πadm
Y (as well as about
the theory of log structures in general) by means of oral communication with K. Fujiwara.
It is easy to see that the intersection ⋂ H of Deﬁnition 2.4 is a normal subgroup of
ΠY .T h u s , Πadm
Y is a group. Moreover, by Lemmas 2.2 and 2.3, it follows that an open
subgroup H ⊆ ΠY is co-admissible if and only if Ker(ΠY → Πadm
Y ) ⊆ H. Finally, it is
immediate from the deﬁnitions that the subﬁeld of
 K stabilized by the image of ⋂ H in
Gal(
K/K) is the maximal tamely ramiﬁed extensionK∞ of K. Thus, we have a surjection
Πadm
Y → Gal(K∞ /K)
whose kernel Δadm
Y ⊆ Πadm
Y is a quotient of ΔY .
Deﬁnition 2.5: We shall refer to as orderly coverings of Yη those coverings Zη → Yη
which are Galois and factor as Zη → Yη ×T U → Yη, where the ﬁrst morphism is pre-
admissible; the second morphism is the natural projection; U = Spec(B);a n d B is a
tamely ramiﬁed ﬁnite extension of A. We shall refer to as orderly quotients of Πadm
Y those
quotients of Πadm
Y that give rise to orderly coverings of Yη.
It is easy to see that orderly quotients of Πadm
Y are coﬁnal among all quotients of Π adm
Y
.
Let A∞ ⊆ K∞ be the normalization of A in K∞ .L e t k∞ (respectively, m∞ )b et h e
residue ﬁeld (respectively, maximal ideal) of A∞ .L e t T∞ = Spec(A∞ ), and let us endow
T∞ with the log structure given by the multiplicative monoid OT∞ −{ 0} (equipped with
the natural morphism into OT∞ ). We call the resulting log scheme Tlog
∞ .L e t Slog
∞ be
the log scheme whose underlying scheme is Spec(k∞ ) and whose log structure is pulled
back from Tlog
∞ . Thus, the log structure on Slog
∞ is (noncanonically!) isomorphic to the log
structure deﬁned by the zero morphism (Z(p))≥0 → k∞ . (Here “( Z(p))≥0” denotes the set of
nonnegative rational numbers whose denominators are prime top.) Note that Gal(K∞ /K)
induces Slog-automorphisms of Slog
∞ . In fact, it is easy to see that this correspondence
deﬁnes a natural isomorphism
Gal(K∞ /K) ∼= AutSlog (Slog
∞ )
Now we have the following important
Lemma 2.6 : Suppose that we are given:
(1) another lifting (Y ′)log → (T ′)log (where T ′ = Spec(A′))o f Xlog → Slog
(2) an algebraic closure
 K
′
of K′ = Q(A′) (hence a resulting K′
∞ ⊆
 K
′
;
(S′)log
∞ );
9

(3) an Slog-isomorphism γ : Slog
∞ ∼= (S′)log
∞ ;
(4) a base-point y′ ∈ Y ′(A′) such that y|S = y′|S in X(k).
Then there is a natural isomorphism between the surjections Πadm
Y → Gal(K∞ /K) and
Πadm
Y ′ → Gal(K′
∞ /K′).
Proof: Let us ﬁrst consider coverings of Yη obtained by pulling back tamely ramiﬁed
Galois coverings of K.T h u s , i fU = Spec(B) → T is ﬁnite, Galois, and tamely ramiﬁed
(obtained from some ﬁeld extension K ⊆ L), let Ulog be the log scheme obtained by
equipping U with the log structure deﬁned by the special point u of U. Thus, we obtain a
ﬁnite, log ´etale morphism Ulog → Tlog. By base-changing to Slog, we then obtain a ﬁnite,
log ´etale morphism V log → Slog. On the other hand, by the deﬁnition of “log ´etaleness,”
this morphism then necessarily lifts to a ﬁnite, log ´ etale morphism ( U′)log → (T ′)log,
whose underlying morphism U′ → T ′ is a Galois, tamely ramiﬁed ﬁnite extension. Thus,
if we pass to the limit, and apply this construction to the extension L = K∞ of K,w e
end up with some maximal tamely ramiﬁed extension L′ of K′. By the functoriality of
this construction, we have a natural isomorphism Gal(L/K) ∼= Gal(L′/K′). Now observe
that there is a unique K′-isomorphism L′ ∼= K′
∞ which (relative to this construction) is
compatible with γ. Thus, we get an isomorphism Gal(L′/K′)= Gal(K′
∞ /K′), hence an
isomorphism Gal(K∞ /K) ∼= Gal(K′
∞ /K′), as desired.
Now let us consider orderly coverings Zη → Yη. Thus, we have a factorization
Zη → Yη ×T U → Yη.L e t Z be the normalization of Yη in Z.T h e nZ → Y ×T U is
multi-admissible. Thus, Z admits a log structure such that we have a log multi-admissible
covering Zlog → Y log ×Tlog Ulog. Base-changing, we obtain a log multi-admissible cov-
ering Zlog|Slog → Xlog ×Slog V log. But since log multi-admissible coverings are log
´etale, it thus follows that this covering lifts uniquely to a log multi-admissible covering
(Z′)log → (Y ′)log ×(T ′)log (U′)log. Similarly, we obtain a bijective correspondence between
Yη-automorphisms of Zη and Y ′
η′ -automorphisms of Z′
η′ . Now observe further that K∞ -
valued points of Zη over yK∞ deﬁne A∞ -valued points of Z over y (since Z is proper over
A). Moreover, these points deﬁne Tlog
∞ -valued points of Zlog over yTlog
∞
, hence (by reduc-
ing modulo m∞ ) Slog
∞ -valued points of Zlog|Slog over ySlog , hence (using γ)( S′)log
∞ -valued
points of Zlog|Slog over ySlog = y′
Slog , hence (by log ´etaleness) (T ′)log
∞ -valued points of
(Z′)log over y′
Tlog , which, ﬁnally, give rise to K′
∞ -valued points of Z′
η′ over y′
K′
∞
.
Thus, in summary, we have deﬁned a natural equivalence of categories between orderly
coverings of Yη and orderly coverings of Y ′
η′. Moreover, this equivalence is compatible
with the ﬁber functors deﬁned by the base-points yK∞ and y′
K′
∞
. Thus, we obtain an
isomorphism between the surjections Πadm
Y → Gal(K∞ /K)a n dΠadm
Y ′ → Gal(K′
∞ /K′), as
desired. ⃝
Now let us interpret Lemma 2.6. In summary, what Lemma 2.6 says is the following:
Suppose we start with the following data:
10

(1) a log scheme Slog,w h e r eS = Spec(k), and the log structure is (non-
canonically!) isomorphic to the log structure associated to the zero
morphism N → k;
(2) a log scheme Slog
∞ over Slog which is (noncanonically!) k-isomorphic to
Spec(
k) equipped with the log structure associated to the zero morphism
(Z(p))≥0 →
 k (where the N ⊆ (Z(p))≥0 is pulled back from a chart for
Slog as in (1));
(3) a stable log-curve Xlog → Slog of genus g;
(4) a base-point x ∈ X(k) which is not a node.
Then, to this data, we can naturally associate an “admissible fundamental group” Π adm
X
with augmentation Πadm
X
→ ΠSlog
def
= AutSlog (Slog
∞ ). That is to say, by choosing a lifting
of the above data, we may take Π adm
X =Π adm
Y
, and the augmentation to be Π adm
Y
→
Gal(K∞ /K). Then Lemma 2.6 says that, up to canonical isomorphism, Π adm
X and its
augmentation do not depend on the choice of lifting.
Deﬁnition 2.7: We shall refer to the data (1) through (4) above as admissible data
of genus g. Given admissible data as above, we shall write π1(Xlog,xSlog
∞
) for Πadm
X and
π1(Slog,S log
∞ ) for ΠSlog . We shall refer to Πadm
X as the admissible fundamental group ofX.
Write Δ Xlog ⊆ Πadm
X for the kernel of the augmentation. We shall refer to Δ Xlog as the
geometric admissible fundamental group of X.
Next, let us observe that ΠSlog admits a natural surjection onto ΠS
def
= Gal(
k/k). We
shall denote the kernel of this surjection by IS ⊆ ΠSlog , and refer to IS as the inertia
subgroup of ΠSlog . Note that IS is isomorphic to the inverse limit of the various (k′)× (for
ﬁnite extensions k′ ⊆
 k of k), where the transition morphisms in the inverse limit are given
by taking the norm. Or, in other words, IS = ˆZ′(1), where ˆZ′ is the inverse limit of the
quotients of Z of order prime to p, and the “(1)” is a Tate twist. Thus, we have a natural
exact sequence
1 → IS = ˆZ′(1) → ΠSlog → ΠS = Gal(
k/k) → 1
Suppose that we are given a continuous action of ΠSlog on a ﬁnite set Σ. Then we can
associate a geometric object to Σ as follows. Without loss of generality, we can assume
that the action on Σ is transitive. If we choose a liftingT
log of Slog (where T = Spec(A)),
then Σ corresponds to some ﬁnite, tamely ramiﬁed extension L of K.L e t B be the
normalization of A in L. Equip U
def
= Spec(B) with the log structure deﬁned by the special
point u of U.T h u s ,w eo b t a i nUlog. Equip Spec(k(u)) with the log structure induced by
that of Ulog. Then the geometric object associated to Σ is the ﬁnite, log ´ etale morphism
11

Spec(k(u))log → Slog. We shall call such morphisms ﬁnite, tamely ramiﬁed coverings of
Slog.
Now suppose that we have an open subgroupH ⊆ Πadm
X that surjects onto ΠSlog .L e t
Δ H
def
= H ⋂Δ Xlog . In terms of liftings, H corresponds to a ﬁnite ´etale covering Zη → Yη,
where Zη is geometrically connected overη. Note that by a well-known criterion ([SGA7]),
Zη has stable reduction overA if and only ifIS acts unipotently onHom(ΔH, Zl) (for some
prime l distinct from p). But, as noted above, in this situation, Zη has stable reduction if
and only if Zη → Yη is pre-admissible. If Zη → Yη is pre-admissible, it extends to some
Zlog → Y log, which we can base-change viaSlog → Tlog to obtain a log admissible covering
Zlog|Slog → Xlog. Conversely, every log admissible covering of Xlog can be obtained in
this manner. Thus, in summary, we have the following result:
Corollary 2.8: The open subgroups ofΠadm
X that correspond to orderly coverings can be
characterized entirely group-theoretically by means of Πadm
X → ΠSlog (and ΠSlog → ΠS).
Moreover, these subgroups can be interpreted in terms of geometric coverings of Xlog
(namely, base-change via a ﬁnite, tamely ramiﬁed covering of Slog, followed by a log
admissible covering).
Remark: Note that this Corollary thus allows us to speak of “orderly coverings of Xlog,”
i.e., coverings that arise from orderly quotients (Deﬁnition 2.5) of Π adm
X =Π adm
Y
.
Before continuing, let us make the following useful technical observation:
Lemma 2.9 : Given any stable X over k, there always exists an admissible covering
Z → X such that Z is (multi-stable and) sturdy.
Indeed, this follows from the deﬁnition of an admissible covering, plus elementary com-
binatorial considerations. Moreover, an admissible covering of a sturdy curve is always
sturdy. Thus, if one wishes to work only with sturdy curves, one can always pass to such
a situation by replacing our original X by some suitable admissible covering of X.
Finally, although most of this paper deals with the case of nonpointed stable curves,
it turns out that we will need to deal with pointed stable curves a bit later on. In fact, it
will suﬃce to consider pointed smooth curves. Thus, let g and r be nonnegative integers
such that 2g − 2+ r ≥ 1. Let S
log
∞ → Slog be as above, and letXlog → Slog be an r-pointed
stable log-curve of genus g such that X is k-smooth. Also, let x ∈ X(k) be a nonmarked
point. Then it is easy to see that, just as above, we can deﬁne (by considering various
liftings to some A, then showing that what we have done does not depend on the lifting)
an admissible fundamental group Πadm
X (with base-point xSlog
∞
), together with a natural
surjection
Πadm
X → ΠSlog
12

Moreover, the kernel ΔXlog ⊆ Πadm
X of this surjection is naturally isomorphic to the tame
fundamental group of X
k (with base-point x
k). Unlike the singular case, we don’t particu-
lar gain anything new by doing this, but what will be important is that we still nonetheless
obtain a natural surjection Πadm
X → ΠSlog which arises functorially from the same frame-
work as the nontrivial Πadm
X → ΠSlog that appears in the case of singular curves.
Section 3: Characterization of the ´Etale F undamental Group
We maintain the notation of the preceding Section. Thus, in particular, we have a
stable log-curve Xlog → Slog, together with a choice of Slog
∞ , and a base-point x ∈ X(k)
(which is not a node). Then note that we have a natural morphism of exact sequences:
1 −→ Δ Xlog −→ Πadm
X −→ ΠSlog −→ 1
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
1 −→ Δ
X −→ ΠX −→ ΠS −→ 1
Here the vertical arrows are all surjections. The goal of this Section is to show how one
can recover the quotient Πadm
X → ΠX group-theoretically from Πadm
X → ΠSlog .
Let Y log → Xlog be a log admissible covering which is abelian, with Galois group
equal to Fl,w h e r el is a prime number (which is not necessarily distinct from p). Let us
consider the following condition on this covering:
(*) Over
k, there is an inﬁnite log admissible coveringZlog → Xlog
k which
is abelian with Galois group Zl such that the intermediate covering
corresponding to Zl → Fl is Y log
k → Xlog
k .
Here, by “inﬁnite log admissible covering,” we mean an inverse limit of log admissible
coverings in the usual ﬁnite sense. Suppose that Y log → Xlog satisﬁes (*). Then we claim
that Y → X is, in fact, ´etale. Indeed, if p = l, then every abelian log admissible covering
of degree l is automatically ´etale, so there is nothing to prove. If p ̸= l, then we can ﬁx a
node ν ∈ X, and consider the ramiﬁcation over the two branches of X at ν. Considering
this ramiﬁcation gives rise to an inertia subgroup H ⊆ Zl.I f Y log → Xlog is ramiﬁed
at ν,t h e nH surjects onto Fl,s o H = Zl. On the other hand, by the deﬁnition of a
log admissible covering, in order to have inﬁnite ramiﬁcation occuring over the geometric
branches of X at ν, we must also have inﬁnite ramiﬁcation over the base Slog.B u t , b y
(*), Zlog → Xlog is already log admissible over Slog ⊗k
 k (which is, of course, ´etale over
Slog). This contradiction shows that Zlog, and hence Y log, are unramiﬁed over Xlog at ν.
Thus, we see that (*) implies thatY → X is ´etale, as claimed. Note that conversely, if we
know that Y → X is ´etale to begin with, then it is easy to see that (*) is satisﬁed. Thus,
for an abelian log admissible covering Y log → Xlog of prime degree l, (*) is equivalent to
the ´etaleness of Y → X.
13

Now observe that the kernel of ΔXlog → Δ X is normal not just in Δ Xlog, but also in
Πadm
X .L e t Π′
X
=Π adm
X
/Ker(Δ Xlog → Δ X). Let Δ ′
X be the kernel of Π ′
X
→ ΠS.T h u s ,
Δ X ⊆ Δ ′
X ⊆ Π′
X. Then we have the following result:
Proposition 3.1: The quotient Πadm
X → Π′
X can be recovered entirely group theoreti-
cally from Πadm
X → ΠSlog .
Proof: It suﬃces to characterize subgroups H ⊆ Πadm
X of ﬁnite index that contain
Ker(Δ Xlog → Δ X). Without loss of generality, we may assume that H is normal in
Πadm
X and (by Corollary 2.8) corresponds to an orderly covering. Since an orderly covering
may be factored as a composite of a log multi-admissible covering followed by a tamely
ramiﬁed covering of S
log, one sees immediately that we may reduce to the case where
H corresponds to a log admissible covering. Let G =Π adm
X /H.L e t Y log → Xlog be
the corresponding covering. For every subgroup N ⊆ G, denote by Y log → Y log
N the
corresponding intermediate covering. By considering ramiﬁcation at the nodes, one sees
immediately that Y → X is ´etale if and only for every cyclic N ⊆ G of prime order,
Y → YN is ´etale. But for such N,t h e´etaleness of Y → YN is equivalent to the condition
(*) discussed above. Moreover, it is clear that (*) can be phrased in entirely group theoretic
terms, using only Π
adm
X → ΠSlog (and ΠSlog → ΠS). This completes the proof. ⃝
Now suppose thatY log → Xlog is anabelian orderly covering of prime orderl obtained
from a quotient of Π ′
X such that Y is geometrically connected. Assume l ̸= p. Consider
the following condition on Y log → Xlog:
(† ) There do not exist any inﬁnite abelian orderly coveringsZlog → Xlog
k
with Galois group Zl that satisfy both of the following two conditions:
(i) the intermediate covering corresponding to Zl → Fl is Y log
k → Xlog
k ;
(ii) some ﬁnite power φM of the Frobenius morphism φ ∈ Γ=Π S
stabilizes Zlog → Xlog
k and acts on the Galois group Zl with eigenvalue
qM .
Because Y log → Xlog is abelian of prime order, it follows that one of the following holds:
(1) Y log → Xlog is obtained from an ´etale covering Y → X (where Y is
geometrically connected) base-changed by Slog → S.
(2) Y log → Xlog is obtained by base-change via Xlog → Slog from some
totally (tamely) ramiﬁed covering of Slog.
Suppose that († ) is satisﬁed. Then we claim that (1) holds. Indeed, if this were false, then
(2) would hold, but it is clear that if (2) holds, then one can easily constructZlog → Xlog
k
that contradict († ) (by pulling back viaXlog → Slog an inﬁnite ramiﬁed covering of Slog).
14

This proves the claim. Now suppose that (1) holds. Then we claim that ( † ) is satisﬁed.
To prove this, suppose that there exists an oﬀendingZlog → Xlog
k . This oﬀending covering
deﬁnes an injection Zl ↪→ Hom(Δ ′
X, Zl) → Hom(ΔX, Zl)= H1
´et(X
k, Zl). On the other
hand, as we saw in Section 1, by the Weil conjectures, no powerφM of φacts with eigenvalue
qM on H1
´et(X
k, Zl). This contradiction completes the proof of the claim. Thus, in summary,
(1) is equivalent to († ). In other words, we have essentially proven the following result:
Proposition 3.2: The quotient Πadm
X → ΠX can be recovered entirely group theoreti-
cally from Πadm
X → ΠSlog .
Proof: It suﬃces to characterize ﬁnite index subgroupsH ⊆ Π′
X that containKer(Π′
X →
ΠX). Without loss of generality, we may assume that H is normal in Π ′
X and (by Corol-
lary 2.8) corresponds to an orderly covering. Let G =Π ′
X/H.L e t Y log → Xlog be the
corresponding covering. Again, without loss of generality, we may assume that Y is geo-
metrically connected over k. For every normal subgroup N ⊆ G, denote by Y log
N → Xlog
the corresponding intermediate covering. Next, we observe the following: Y log → Xlog
arises from an ´etale covering of X if and only if, for every normal subgroup N ⊆ G such
that Y log
N → Xlog is orderly and G/N is cyclic of prime order, YN → X arises from an
´etale covering of X. (This equivalence follows immediately from the deﬁnitions and the
fact that Δ ′
X/Δ X is abelian.) But for such Y log
N → Xlog, we can apply the criterion ( † )
discussed above. Moreover, it is clear that ( † ) can be phrased in entirely group theoretic
terms, using only Π′
X → ΠSlog (and ΠSlog → ΠS). This completes the proof. ⃝
Section 4: The Decomposition Group of an Irreducible Component
We maintain the notation of the preceding Section. Fix an irreducible component
I ⊆ X. Then, corresponding to I, there is a unique (up to conjugacy) decomposition
subgroup
Δ adm
I ⊆ Πadm
X
which may be deﬁned as follows. Let Zlog → Xlog be the log scheme obtained by taking
the inverse limit of the various Y log
H → Xlog corresponding to open orderly subgroups
H ⊆ Πadm
X . Choose an “irreducible component” J ⊆ Z that maps down to I ⊆ X. Here,
by “irreducible component of Z,” we mean a compatible system of irreducible components
IH ⊆ YH.T h e n Δadm
I ⊆ Πadm
X is the subgroup of elements that take the irreducible
component J to itself. We can also deﬁne an inertia subgroup
Δ in
I ⊆ Δ adm
I
as follows: Namely, we let Δ in
I be the subgroup of elements of Δ adm
I
that act trivially on
J. (That is to say, elements of Δin
I will, in general, act nontrivially on the log structure of
15

J, but trivially on the underlying scheme J.) By Proposition 3.2 and Corollaries 1.5 and
1.6, we thus obtain the following:
Proposition 4.1: Suppose that X is stable and sturdy . Then one can recover the
set of irreducible components of X from Πadm
X → ΠSlog . Moreover, for each irreducible
component I of X, one can recover the corresponding inertia and decomposition subgroups
Δ in
I ⊆ Δ adm
I ⊆ Πadm
X entirely from Πadm
X → ΠSlog .
Proof: That one can recover Δadm
I follows formally from Proposition 3.2 and Corollary
1.5. Now observe that (as is well known – see, e.g., [DM]) any automorphism ofI that acts
trivially on Jl(I)( w h e r el ≥ 5) is the identity. This observation, coupled with Corollary
1.6, allows one to recover Δin
I . ⃝
Now let us suppose that the base-point x ∈ X(k) is contained in I.L e t ˜I be the
normalization of I. Then one can also deﬁne Δ adm
I as follows. Let ˘I ⊆ I be the open
subset which is the complement of the nodes. We give ˘I a log structure by restricting to ˘I
the log structure of Xlog. Denote the resulting log scheme by ˘Ilog.N o wl e tu sr e g a r dt h e
points of ˜I that map to nodes of I as marked points of ˜I.T h i sg i v e s˜I the structure of a
smooth, pointed curve over k. Because ˜I → Spec(k) is smooth, it follows that there exists
a unique multistable pointed log-curve ˜Ilog → Slog whose underlying curve is ˜I and whose
marked points are as just speciﬁed. Since x ∈ ˜I(k), by using Slog
∞ → Slog, we can deﬁne
(as in the discussion as the end of Section 2) the admissible fundamental group Πadm
I of
˜Ilog. Moreover, we have natural log morphisms
˘Ilog −→ Xlog
⏐⏐
↓
˜I
log
where the vertical morphism is an open immersion. Now observe that if we restrict (say,
orderly) coverings of Xlog to ˘Ilog, such a covering extends naturally to an orderly covering
of ˜Ilog. Thus, we obtain a natural morphism
ζI :Π adm
I → Πadm
X
It is immediate from the deﬁnitions that the subgroup ζI(Πadm
I ) ⊆ Πadm
X is a “Δ adm
I
.”
Proposition 4.2: Suppose that X is stable and sturdy . Then the morphism ζI is
injective.
Proof: Let Π I
Slog be the image of Π adm
I in Π Slog . Then let us note that we have a
commutative diagram of exact sequences:
16

1 −→ Δ ˜Ilog −→ Πadm
I −→ ΠI
Slog −→ 1
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
1 −→ Δ
Xlog −→ Πadm
X −→ ΠSlog −→ 1
where the vertical arrow on the right is the natural inclusion. Thus, it suﬃces to prove
that Δ ˜Ilog → Δ Xlog is injective. In particular, we are always free to replace Slog by a
ﬁnite, tamely ramiﬁed covering of Slog.
Now it suﬃces to show that (up to base-changing, when necessary, by ﬁnite, tamely
ramiﬁed coverings of Slog) we can obtain every log admissible covering of ˜Ilog by pulling
back a log admissible covering of Xlog. Let us call X untangled at I if every node of X
that lies on I also lies on an irreducible component of X distinct from I. In general, we
can form a (“combinatorial”) ´etale covering of X as follows: Write X = I ⋃J,w h e r eJ is
the union of the irreducible components of X other than I.L e t ˜I1 and ˜I2 (respectively,
J1 and J2) be copies of ˜I (respectively, J). For i =1 ,2, let us glue ˜Ii to Ji at every node
of I that also lies on J.I f ν is a node of I that only lies on I,l e tα and β be the points
of ˜I that lie over ν.T h e n g l u eα1 ∈ ˜I1 to β2 ∈ ˜I2,a n dβ1 ∈ ˜I1 to α2 ∈ ˜I2. With these
various gluings, ˜I1
⋃ ˜I2
⋃ J1
⋃ J2 forms a curve Y which is ﬁnite ´etale over X.M o r e o v e r ,
Y is untangled at ˜I1 and ˜I2,a n dΠadm
I =Π adm
I
i (for i =1 ,2). Thus, it suﬃces to prove the
Proposition under the assumption that X is untangled at I. Therefore, for the remainder
of the proof, we shall assume that X is untangled at I.
Now we would like to construct another double ´etale covering of X. For convenience,
we will assume that p ≥ 3. (The case p = 2 is only combinatorially a bit more diﬃcult.)
Write X = I ⋃ J,a sa b o v e .S i n c eX is sturdy, it follows that (after possibly enlarging k),
there exists an ´etale covering ˜J → J of degree two such that for any irreducible component
C ⊆ J, the restriction of ˜J → J to C is nontrivial. Let I1 and I2 be copies of I.I f ν is
an o d eo nI and J,l e tα (respectively, β) be the corresponding point on I (respectively,
J). (After possibly enlarging k) we may assume that ˜J has two k-rational points β1 and
β2 over β ∈ J.N o w , f o ri =1 ,2, glue αi ∈ Ii to βi ∈ ˜J. We thus obtain a double ´etale
covering Y = I1
⋃ I2
⋃ ˜J → X. Endow Y with the log structure obtained by pulling back
the log structure of Xlog. One can then deﬁne various log structures on the irreducible
components of Y , analogously to the way in which various log structures were deﬁned on
an irreducible component I of X above. We will then use similar notation for the log
structures thus obtained on irreducible components of Y .
Now let Llog → Ilog be a Galois log admissible covering of Ilog def
= ˜Ilog (recall that
I = ˜I)o fd e g r e ed.L e tMlog → ˜Jlog be an abelian log multi-admissible covering of degree
d with the following property:
(*) For each node ν on I and J, suppose that over the corresponding
α ∈ I, L has n geometric points, each ramiﬁed with index e over I.
17

Then, we stipulate that for i =1 ,2, over βi ∈ ˜J, M has n geometric
points, each ramiﬁed with index e over I.
Note that such an Mlog → ˜Jlog exists precisely because the β’s on ˜J come in pairs.N o w
let Llog
1 and Llog
2 be copies of Llog. Then, for each i =1 ,2, let us glue the geometric
points of Li|αi to those of M|βi . This gives us (after possibly replacing Slog by a tamely
ramiﬁed covering of Slog) a log admissible coveringZlog → Y log,w h e r eZ = L1
⋃ L2
⋃M.
Moreover, the restriction ofZlog → Y log to Ilog
i (for i =1 ,2) isLlog → Ilog. This completes
the proof of the Proposition. ⃝
Section 5: The Set of Nodes
We continue with the notation of the preceding Section. Thus,Xlog → Slog is a stable
log-curve of genus g. Let us also assume that X is sturdy. In this Section, we would like
to show how (by a technique similar to, but slightly more complicated than that employed
in Section 1) we can recover the set of nodes of X. This, in turn, will allow us to recover
the decomposition group of a node. In the following Section, we shall then show how the
log structure at a node can be reconstructed from the decomposition group at the node.
Let l and n be prime numbers distinct from each other and from p. We assume
moreover that l ≡ 1( mod n). This means that all n
th roots of unity are contained in Fl.
Let us write Gn ⊆ F×
l for the subgroup of nth roots of unity. Next, let us ﬁx a Gn-torsor
over X
k
Y → X
which is nontrivial over the generic point of every irreducible component of X
k. (Here,
by Gn-torsor, we mean a cyclic ´ etale covering of X of degree n whose Galois group
is equipped with an isomorphism with Gn.) Equip Y with the log structure pulled
back from that of Xlog. Let us consider the admissible fundamental group Π adm
Y of
Y log.L e t H1
adm(Y log
k , Fl)
def
= Hom(ΔY log , Fl). Note that we have a natural injection
Le def
= H1
´et(Y
k, Fl) ↪→ La def
= H1
adm(Y log
k , Fl). Let us write Lr for the cokernel of this in-
jection. (Here, “ e” (respectively, “a”; “r”) stands for “´etale” (respectively, “admissible”;
“ramiﬁcation”). Thus, we have an exact sequence
0 → Le → La → Lr → 0
which may (by Proposition 3.2) be recovered from Π adm
X → ΠSlog and the subgroup of
Πadm
X that deﬁnes Y → X. Note, moreover, that Gn acts on the above exact sequence.
Let Lr
G ⊆ Lr be the subset of elements on whichGn acts via the character Gn ↪→ F×
l .L e t
L∗ ⊆ La be the subset of elements that map to nonzero elements of Lr
G.
18

We would like to analyzeLr
G. First of all, let us consider Lr. For each node ν ∈ Y (
k),
write Yν for the completion ofY at ν,a n dl e tγν and δν be the two irreducible components
of Yν.L e tD′
Y (respectively, EY ) be the free Fl-module which is the direct sum of copies of
Fl(−1) (where the “(−1)” is a Tate twist) generated by the symbolsγν, δν (respectively, I),
as ν (respectively, I) ranges over all the nodes of Yν (respectively, irreducible components
of Y
k). Let DY ⊆ D′
Y be the submodule generated by (γν − δν) · Fl(−1) (where ν ranges
over all the nodes of Yν). Note that we have a natural morphism D′
Y → EY given by
assigning to the symbol γν (respectively, δν) the unique irreducible component I in which
γν (respectively, δν) is contained. In particular, restricting to DY , we obtain a morphism
DY → EY
Let KY ⊆ DY be the kernel of this morphism. Now let us note that we have a natural
morphism
λ : Lr → D′
Y
given by restricting an admissible covering of Y
k to the various γν and δν. It follows
immediately from the deﬁnition of an admissible covering that Im(λ) ⊆ DY .M o r e o v e r ,
by considering the Leray-Serre spectral sequence in ´etale cohomology for the morphism
˘I↪ → ˜I (where ˜I ⊆ Y
k is the normalization of an irreducible component of Y
k,a n d˘I is the
complement of the points that map to nodes), plus the deﬁnition of an admissible covering,
one sees easily that, in fact, λ(/suppressL
r)= KY . Finally, by counting dimensions, we see that
λ is injective. Thus, we see that λ deﬁnes a natural isomorphism of Lr with KY .I nt h e
following, we shall identify Lr and KY by means of λ.
Now let us consider the subset Lr
G ⊆ Lr.L e t μ ∈ X(
k) be a node. For each such μ,
l e tu sﬁ xan o d eν ∈ Y (
k)o v e rμ.I f σ ∈ Gn (regarded as the Galois group of Y → X), we
shall write aσ ∈ F×
l for σ regarded as an element of F×
l . Fix a generator ω ∈ Fl(−1). Let
ωμ
def
=
∑
σ∈Gn
(a−1
σ · ω)(σ(γν) − σ(δν)) ∈ DY
One checks easily that ωμ is, in fact, an element of KY = Lr. Moreover, by calculating
τ(ωμ)( f o rτ ∈ Gn), one sees that ωμ is manifestly an element of Lr
G ⊆ Lr. Finally, it is
routine to check that, in fact,Lr
G is freely generated by theωμ (as μ ranges over the nodes
of X(
k) – but ω is ﬁxed). This completes our analysis of Lr
G.
Suppose that α ∈ L∗.L e t Zα → Y
k be the corresponding covering. Let ϵ : L∗ → Z
be the morphism that maps α to NZα (i.e., the number of nodes of Zα). Let M ⊆ L∗ be
the subset of elements α on which ϵ attains its maximum. Let us deﬁne a pre-equivalence
relation “ ∼”o nM as follows:
If α, β ∈ M,t h e nw ew r i t eα ∼ β if, for every λ, μ ∈ F×
l for which
λ · α + μ · β ∈ L∗,w eh a v eλ · α + μ · β ∈ M.
19

Now we have the following result:
Proposition 5.1: Suppose that X is stable and sturdy .T h e n “ ∼” is, in fact, an
equivalence relation, and moreover, M/ ∼ is naturally isomorphic to the set of nodes of
X
k.
Proof: Suppose that α ∈ L∗ maps to a linear combination (with nonzero coeﬃcients) of
precisely c ≥ 1 of the elements ωμ ∈ Lr
G. Then one calculates easily that Zα has precisely
ϵ(α)= l(NY − cn)+ cn = l ·NY +cn(1 − l) nodes. Thus, ϵ(α) attains its maximum precisely
when c =1 .T h u s ,M ⊆ L∗ consists of those α which map to a nonzero multiple of one of
the ωμ’s. It is thus easy to see (as in the proof of Proposition 1.3) that M/ ∼ is naturally
isomorphic to the set of nodes μ ∈ X(
k). ⃝
Remark: Note that at ﬁrst glance the set M/ ∼ appears to depend on the choice of n, l,
and Y → X. However, it is not diﬃcult to see that in fact, if one chooses diﬀerent data
n′ ̸= n, l′ ̸= l,a n dY ′ → X, and hence obtains a resulting M′/ ∼′, then there is a natural
isomorphism (M/ ∼) ∼= (M′/ ∼′) (compatible with the isomorphisms just obtained of
M/ ∼ and M′/ ∼′ to the set of nodes of X
k) as follows: If α ∈ M and α′ ∈ M′,l e tu s
consider the product Zαα ′ = Zα ×X Z′
α. Thus, we have an admissible covering Zαα ′ → X
of degree (ln)(l′n′). Then one checks easily that α and α′ correspond to the same node if
and only if (Zαα ′ )
k has precisely nn′{l · l′(NX − 1) + 1} nodes.
Proposition 5.2: Suppose that X is stable and sturdy. Then the set of nodes of X
k
(together with its naturalΠS-action) can be recovered entirely fromΠadm
X → ΠSlog .M o r e -
over, (relative to Proposition 1.4) for each nodeμ of X
k, the set of irreducible components
of X
k containing μ can also be recovered entirely from Πadm
X → ΠSlog .
Proof: Indeed, (after possibly replacing k by a ﬁnite extension of k)o n ec a na l w a y s
choose l, n,a n dY → X as above. Then one can recover Le and La from Πadm
X → ΠSlog
and the subgroup of Πadm
X deﬁned by Y → X. Thus, one can also recover Lr.W es a wi n
Section 1 that for anyZα, NZα − IZα ,a sw e l la sIZα , may be recovered group-theoretically.
In particular, NZα can also be recovered group-theoretically. Thus, M and ∼ can also be
recovered group-theoretically. Moreover, by the above Remark, M/ ∼ is independent of
the choice of n, l,a n dY → X. (That is to say, the isomorphism ( M/ ∼) ∼= (M′/ ∼′)o f
the above Remark can clearly be recovered group-theoretically.) This completes the proof
that the nodes can be recovered group-theoretically.
Now let us consider the issue of determining which irreducible components ofX
k (rel-
ative to the reconstruction of the set of irreducible components ofX
k given in Proposition
1.4) μ lies on. To this end, note ﬁrst that (by Corollary 1.6) the genusgI of each irreducible
component I of X
k can also be recovered group-theoretically. (Indeed, Jl(I) has precisely
l2gI elements.) Thus, if α ∈ M corresponds to the node μ, the irreducible components I
20

of X
k containing μ are precisely those that are the image of irreducible components J of
Zα such that (gJ − 1) >l · n · (gI − 1). ⃝
Corollary 5.3: Suppose that X is stable and sturdy. LetH ⊆ Πadm
X be an open orderly
subgroup. Let Y log
H → Xlog be the corresponding covering. Then the sets of nodes NYH
and NX of YH and X, respectively, as well as the natural morphism NYH →N X can be
recovered from Πadm
X → ΠSlog and H. Moreover, the set of irreducible components of
(YH)
k on which each node of NYH lies can also be recovered from Πadm
X → ΠSlog and H.
Proof: In this case, in order to obtain the morphism NYH →N X it is useful to choose l
and n prime to the index of H in Πadm
X , and to choose the Gn-torsor “ Y ”o v e rYH to be
the pull-back of a Gn-torsor on XH. The rest of the proof is straightforward. ⃝
Now let μ be a node of X.L e tI ⊆ X be an irreducible component of X on which μ
sits. Then there is a unique (up to conjugacy) decomposition subgroup
Δ adm
μ ⊆ Πadm
X
which may be deﬁned as follows. Let Zlog → Xlog be the log scheme obtained by taking
the inverse limit of the various Y log
H → Xlog corresponding to open orderly subgroups
H ⊆ Πadm
X . Choose a “node” ν ∈ Z that maps down to μ ∈ X. Here, by “node of Z,”
we mean a compatible system of nodes νH ∈ YH.T h e n Δadm
μ ⊆ Πadm
X is the subgroup of
elements that take the nodeν to itself. If ν sits on an irreducible componentJ of Z which
lies over I, then we can also form Δ adm
I ,Δ in
I ⊆ Πadm
X , hence Δ adm
μ,I
def
=Δ adm
I
⋂ Δ adm
μ ,a n d
Δ in
μ,I
def
=Δ in
I
⋂Δ adm
μ . Up to conjugacy, Δ adm
μ,I and Δ in
μ,I
are independent of all the choices
made. Now, it follows formally from Corollary 5.3 that
Corollary 5.4: Given μ and I as above, one can recover Δ adm
μ ;Δ adm
μ,I ;Δ in
μ,I
⊆ Πadm
X
entirely from Πadm
X → ΠSlog .
Section 6: The Log Structure at a Node
We maintain the notation of the preceding Section. In addition to assuming that X
is stable and sturdy, let us assume that it isuntangled (i.e., every node lies on two distinct
irreducible components). Let μ ∈ X(k) be a node of X.L e t I, I′ be the two irreducible
components of X on which μ lies. Let Zlog → Xlog be the covering corresponding to the
trivial subgroup of Πadm
X .L e tνbe a node ofZ lying overμ.L e tJ (respectively, J ′)b et h e
irreducible component ofZ that touches νand lies overI (respectively, I′). Thus, as in the
preceding Section, we have various subgroups, such as Δ adm
μ ,Δ adm
I ,Δ adm
I′ ⊆ Πadm
X . Note
that (since X is untangled) elements of Δ adm
μ ﬁx J and J ′.T h u s , Δadm
μ ⊆ Δ adm
I ,Δ adm
I′ .
21

Next, consider the natural morphism Δ adm
μ ⊆ Πadm
X → ΠS.S i n c eμ is k-rational, this
morphism is surjective. Let us denote the kernel of this morphism by Δin
μ .T h u s ,w eh a v e
an exact sequence
1 → Δ in
μ → Δ adm
μ → ΠS → 1
Moreover, by sorting through the deﬁnitions, it is clear that Δ in
I ,Δ in
I′ ⊆ Δ in
μ .
Next, let us consider the natural morphism Δin
I ⊆ Πadm
X → ΠSlog . It is clear that the
image of this morphism is contained in the inertia subgroup IS ⊆ ΠSlog .T h u s ,w eo b t a i n
a natural morphism Δ in
I → IS. By using the fact that the restriction of the log structure
of Xlog to the generic point of I is the pull-back (to the generic point of I)o ft h el o g
structure of Slog, it is then easy to see that this morphism Δ in
I → IS is an isomorphism.
Thus, we see that we obtain a natural isomorphism
Δ in
I ∼= IS = ˆZ′(1)
In the sequel, we shall identify Δ in
I with ˆZ′(1) via this isomorphism. Similarly, we have
Δ in
I′ ∼= ˆZ′(1).
In order to understand these various groups better, it is helpful to think in terms of a
local model, as follows: If e ≥ 1 is an integer, letR
def
=
 k[[x, y,t]]/(xy − te), A
def
=
 k[[t]] ⊆ R.
Let X
def
= Spec(R), T
def
= Spec(A). Endow T with the log structure deﬁned by the divisor
t =0 . L e tNnode be the monoid given by taking the quotient of the free monoid on the
symbols log(x),log (y),log (t)b yt h er e l a t i o nlog(x)+ log(y) ∼ e · log(t). Map Nnode → R
by letting log(?) ↦→ ?, for ? = x,y,t . Endow X with the log structure associated to
Nnode → R. Thus, we obtain a morphism of log schemes Xlog → Tlog. Let us denote
by τ : Spec(
k) ↪→ T the special point of T. Moreover, there is a unique e such that the
completion of X
k at μ
k is equal to Xlog |τ. We shall call this e the order of the node μ.
Let I = V (y,t )= Spec(
k[[x]]); I′ = V (x,t)= Spec(
k[[y]]); Xτ = X× T τ.L e t
U = X− I− I ′. Let us denote by Π adm
X the quotient of the fundamental group of U
which is tamely ramiﬁed over the divisors I and I′. Note that Π adm
X is abelian (thus
eliminating the need to choose a base point). Indeed, this follows by noting that Π adm
X
for e ≥ 1 injects into Π adm
X for e = 1; but when e =1 , I ⋃ I′ is a divisor with normal
crossings, so Πadm
X ∼= ˆZ′(1) × ˆZ′(1). Let us denote by Π adm
T the tame fundamental group
of T − τ.T h u s , Πadm
T = ˆZ′(1). Note (for instance, by reducing to the case e =1 )t h a t
the decomposition groups of the divisors I and I′ are both equal to Πadm
X . Let us denote
by Δ in
I ,Δ in
I′ ⊆ Πadm
X the inertia groups of the divisors I and I′. As above, it is easy
to see that the natural map Δ in
I ⊆ Πadm
X → Πadm
T is an isomorphism. Thus, we have
isomorphisms Δin
I ∼= ˆZ′(1); Δin
I′ ∼= ˆZ′(1). Observe, moreover, (for instance, by reducing to
the case e =1 )t h a tΔin
I
⋂Δ in
I′ = {1}.
22

Let ξ
def
= V (x,y,t ) ∈ X. Let us denote by Πadm
I the tame fundamental group of I− ξ.
Thus, Πadm
I = ˆZ′(1). Similarly, we have Π adm
I′ = ˆZ′(1). Note, moreover, that we have a
natural morphism Πadm
X /Δ in
I ↪→ Πadm
I . Thus, we obtain a morphism
ˆZ′(1) = Δin
I′ → Πadm
X /Δ in
I → Πadm
I = ˆZ′(1)
This morphism corresponds to multiplication by some elementϵ ∈ ˆZ′. We claim thatϵ = e.
Indeed, this follows from the fact that taking roots of the function x|I on I corresponds
to taking roots of te = y−1 · x over I′ − ξ (since y is invertible on I′ − ξ). Thus, we see
that we have injections
ˆZ′(1) × ˆZ′(1) = Δin
I × Δ in
I′ ↪→ Πadm
X ⊆ Πadm
I′ × Πadm
I = ˆZ′(1) × ˆZ′(1)
Here the composite ˆZ′(1) × ˆZ′(1) → ˆZ′(1) × ˆZ′(1) is given by multiplication by e.
Now let us translate what we have learned locally back into information concerning our
original X. First of all, let us observe that Π adm
X (respectively, Δin
I
;Δ in
I
′ ) corresponds to
Δ in
μ (respectively, Δin
I ;Δ in
I
′ ). Thus, in particular, we obtain that Δ in
I
⋂ Δ in
I′ = {1}.N e x t ,
l e tu so b s e r v et h a tΔadm
I /Δ in
I may be identiﬁed with Π adm
˘I , i.e., the tame fundamental
group of ˘I. Let us denote by Δ in
μ [I] ⊆ Πadm
˘I =Δ adm
I /Δ in
I the subgroup of elements that
ﬁx ν and act trivially on the residue ﬁeld of ν.T h a ti st os a y ,Δin
μ [I] is the inertia group
of μ in Πadm
˘I . In particular, we have a natural isomorphism
Δ in
μ [I] ∼= ˆZ′(1)
Similarly, we have an isomorphism Δ in
μ [I′] ∼= ˆZ′(1). Then Δ in
μ [I] (respectively, Δ in
μ [I′])
corresponds to Πadm
I (respectively, Πadm
I
′ ).
Now let us observe that, by the theory developed thus far, all the subgroups and iso-
morphisms of the above discussion may be recovered from Πadm
X → ΠSlog , except (possibly)
the injections
ιμ : ˆZ′(1) ∼= Δ in
μ [I] ↪→ Πadm
˘I ; ι′
μ : ˆZ′(1) ∼= Δ in
μ [I′] ↪→ Πadm
˘I′
(or, equivalently, except (possibly) the isomorphisms ˆZ′(1) ∼= Δ in
μ [I], ˆZ′(1) ∼= Δ in
μ [I′]).
Thus, we have the following result
Proposition 6.1: Suppose that X is stable, sturdy, and untangled, and thatμ ∈ X(k)
is a node. Then the order e of the node μ may be recovered entirely from Πadm
X → ΠSlog ,
ιμ,a n dι′
μ.
23

Next we would like to consider the issue of reconstructing the log structure ofX at μ
group-theoretically. Let Slog
μ be the log scheme whose underlying scheme is S = Spec(k),
and whose log structure is that obtained by pulling back the log structure of Xlog via μ :
S↪ → X. Thus, we have a natural structure morphism Slog
μ → Slog.L e tMS (respectively,
Mμ) be the monoid deﬁning the log structure of Slog (respectively, Slog
μ ). Thus, we have
k× ⊆ MS; k× ⊆ Mμ.M o r e o v e r ,MS/k× = N; Mμ/k× = Nnode (where Nnode is the monoid
introduced above). The structure morphism Slog
μ → Slog deﬁnes a morphism MS → Mμ
(which is the identity on k×), hence an inclusion N → Nnode. Let us denote by ϵ ∈ Nnode
the image of e ∈ N in Nnode. Let us denote by Le ⊆ MS (respectively, Lϵ ⊆ Mμ)t h e
inverse image ofe ∈ N (respectively, ϵ ∈ Nnode)i n MS (respectively, Mμ). Thus, we obtain
an isomorphism of k×-torsors
ζμ : Le →L ϵ
We would like to reconstruct ζμ group-theoretically.
First, recall that we may naturally regard k× as a quotient of ˆZ′(1). Now it follows
from Kummer theory that
Lemma 6.2 : There is a natural one-to-one correspondence between elements ofLϵ and
morphisms ψ :Δ adm
μ → k× whose restriction to ˆZ′(1) × ˆZ′(1) = Δin
I × Δ in
I′ ⊆ Δ adm
μ is the
composite of the morphism (e,e): ˆZ′(1) × ˆZ′(1) → ˆZ′(1) (i.e., multiplication by e on both
factors) with the natural quotient ˆZ′(1) → k×.
Note that here, the k×-torsor structure on the set of suchψ is given by observing that the
diﬀerence between two suchψ is a morphism Hom(ΠS,k ×), which may be identiﬁed with
k× by means of the Frobenius element φ ∈ Γ=Π S.
Similarly, we have
Lemma 6.3 : There is a natural one-to-one correspondence between elements of Le
and morphisms ψ :Π Slog → k× whose restriction to ˆZ′(1) = IS ⊆ ΠSlog is the composite
of the morphism e· : ˆZ′(1) → ˆZ′(1) (i.e., multiplication by e) with the natural quotient
ˆZ′(1) → k×.
Moreover, the correspondence induced by ζμ : Le ∼= Lϵ between the ψ of Lemma 6.2
and the ψ of Lemma 6.3 is the correspondence obtained by composing Π Slog → k× with
Δ adm
μ ↪→ Πadm
X → ΠSlog .
We thus conclude the following
Proposition 6.4: Suppose that X is stable, sturdy, and untangled, and thatμ ∈ X(k)
is a node. Then the morphism ζμ : Le ∼= Lϵ may be recovered entirely fromΠadm
X → ΠSlog ,
ιμ,a n dι′
μ.
24

Section 7: The Main Result over Finite Fields
We are now ready to put everything together and prove the main result over ﬁnite
ﬁelds. The point is that the theory developed thus far in this paper will allow us to
reduce the Grothendieck conjecture for singular stable log-curves over ﬁnite ﬁelds to the
Grothendieck conjecture for smooth, aﬃne, hyperbolic curves over ﬁnite ﬁelds (which is
already proven in [Tama]).
Let S
log
∞ → Slog be as in Deﬁnition 2.7. Let Xlog → Slog and (X′)log → Slog be
stable log-curves of genus g (equipped with base-points x ∈ X(k)a n dx′ ∈ X′(k)), such
that neither X nor X′ is smooth over k. Let us assume that we are given a commutative
diagram of continuous group homomorphisms:
Πadm
X
αΠ
−→ Πadm
X′
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
ΠSlog
id
−→ ΠSlog
where the vertical morphisms are the natural ones, and the horizontal morphisms are iso-
morphisms. The goal of this Section is to show that (under a certain technical assumption
on the “RT-degree”)α
Π arises (up to conjugation by an element of ΔXlog ) from a geometric
Slog-isomorphism of Xlog with (X′)log.
We begin by proving the result under the following simplifying assumption onX and
X′:
(*) X and X′ are sturdy and untangled, and their nodes are rational
over k.
By Proposition 4.1, αΠ induces a natural isomorphism between the sets of irreducible
components of X and X′.L e t I ⊆ X be an irreducible component. Then there is a
corresponding irreducible component I′ ⊆ X′. Moreover, by Proposition 4.1, αΠ necessar-
ily maps decomposition (respectively, inertia) subgroups of Π adm
X to similar subgroups of
Πadm
X′ .T h u s ,w em a yc h o o s eΔadm
I
⊆ Πadm
X such that αΠ maps Δ adm
I onto Δadm
I
′ ⊆ Πadm
X′ .
Moreover, we also haveαΠ(Δ in
I )=Δ in
I
′ . Thus, since Πadm
˘I
def
=Δ adm
I /Δ in
I , we get a natural
isomorphism
αΠ
˘I :Π adm
˘I
∼= Πadm
˘I′
Now as we saw at the beginning of Section 6, the natural morphism Δ in
I → IS is an
isomorphism. Hence, the quotient of Π adm
˘I induced by Πadm
X → ΠSlog is simply Πadm
˘I →
ΠS. Thus, we see that αΠ
˘I ﬁts into a diagram:
25

Πadm
˘I
αΠ
˘I
−→ Πadm
˘I′
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
Π
S
id
−→ ΠS
Let Δ ˘I = Ker(Πadm
˘I → ΠS). Since ˘I is a smooth aﬃne hyperbolic curve over k,w ea r e
now in a position to apply the theory of [Tama]. The only two consequences of the theory
of [Tama] that we will use in this paper are the following:
(1) αΠ
˘I induces a commutative diagram
˘I
α˘I
−→ ˘I′
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
S
γI
−→ S
of morphisms of schemes. Here the vertical morphisms are the natural
ones, and the horizontal morphisms are isomorphisms. The morphism
γ
I, however, need not be the identity.
(2) For each node μ of X lying on I, the morphisms ιμ : ˆZ′(1) ↪→ Πadm
˘I
(well-deﬁned up to conjugation by an element of Δ ˘I)o fP r o p o s i t i o n
6.1 are taken to each other by αΠ, up to multiplication by some unit
θI ∈ (ˆZ′)×. Here, the automorphism induced by θI on the quotient
ˆZ′(1) → k× is equal to the automorphism of k× induced by γI.
It follows, in particular, that θI ∈ pZ ⊆ Q (i.e., θI is a rational number which is a power
of p). In fact, as we shall see below (Lemma 7.1), θI is independent of I. Thus, we shall
write
degRT (αΠ)
def
= θI ∈ pZ ∈ Q
and we shall refer to this number as the RT-degree of αΠ on I (where “RT” stands for
“ramiﬁcation-theoretic,” as opposed to another type of degree that will be discussed in
Section 9).
Lemma 7.1 : The rational number θ
I is independent of the irreducible component I.
Proof: Suppose that there is another irreducible component J of X that touches I.L e t
J ′ ⊆ X′ be the corresponding component of X′. Let us focus our attention at a node
μ lying on I and J. By Corollary 5.3, there is a corresponding node μ′ ∈ X′(k). Let e
26

(respectively, e′) be the order of the nodeμ (respectively, μ′). Now we have a commutative
diagram:
ˆZ′(1) × ˆZ′(1) = Δin
μ [I] × Δ in
μ [J]
(e,e)
←− ˆZ′(1) × ˆZ′(1) = Δin
J × Δ in
I
(1,1)
−→ ˆZ′(1) = IS
⏐⏐
↓
θI ×θJ
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
id
ˆZ′(1) × ˆZ′(1) = Δin
μ′ [I′] × Δ in
μ′ [J ′]
(e′,e′)
←− ˆZ′(1) × ˆZ′(1) = Δin
J′ × Δ in
I′
(1,1)
−→ ˆZ′(1) = IS
where the vertical map in the middle is that induced by αΠ,a n d θI and θJ are the
morphisms obtained from the theory of [Tama] (cf., item (2) in the list given above). It
follows immediately from the commutativity of this diagram thatθ
I = e′ ·e−1 = θJ .( T h u s ,
we also obtain a new proof of the rationality of θI.) This completes the proof. ⃝
Let us assume henceforth that
(† ) degRT (αΠ )=1
Thus, α˘I is an S-isomorphism, and the ιμ are taken to each other precisely (not just
up to some multiple) by αΠ. By the theory of [Tama], this means that α˘I induces an
S-isomorphism I ∼= I′ that respects nodes. We thus obtain an S-isomorphism
αX : X ∼= X′
Thus, it remains to consider log structures. Let ˜X → X be the normalization of X.L e t
us equip ˜X with the log structure deﬁned by the divisor consisting of the points of ˜X that
map to nodes of X. Thus, we obtain a log scheme ˜Xlog whose log structure is generically
trivial. Similarly, we have ( ˜X′)log. Note that αX already induces an S-isomorphism
α ˜Xlog : ˜Xlog ∼= ( ˜X′)log
Now let us concentrate on a single node μ ∈ X(k) (which corresponds to μ′ ∈ X′(k)). It
is not diﬃcult to see that given ˜Xlog, in order to recover the Slog-log scheme Xlog in a
neighborhood of μ, it suﬃces to know the isomorphism
ζμ : Le ∼= Lϵ
But by Proposition 6.4, this morphism may be recovered from Π adm
X → ΠSlog ,p l u si t e m
(2) of the above review of the theory of [Tama] (now that we know/are assuming that all
the θ
I = 1). Thus, we see that αX extends naturally to a morphism
αXlog : Xlog ∼= (X′)log
27

as desired.
The next step is to check that the morphism induced by αlog
X between Π adm
X and
Πadm
X′ agrees (up to conjugation by an element of Δ Xlog) with the original αΠ.B u t t h i s
follows by using a similar argument to that of [Tama]: Namely, ﬁrst we observe that
it is clear from the construction of α
Xlog that if we start with an αΠ that arises from
some β : Xlog ∼= (X′)log,t h e nβ = αXlog . Then we note that for each orderly covering
Y log → Xlog, there is a corresponding orderly covering ( Y ′)log → (X′)log, together with
an isomorphism Π adm
Y ∼= Πadm
Y ′ induced by αΠ. Moreover, this isomorphism gives rise to
an isomorphism αY log that is compatible with αXlog . It thus follows formally from the
general theory of the algebraic fundamental group that the isomorphism of Π adm
X with
Πadm
X′ induced by αXlog diﬀers from αΠ by conjugation by some element η ∈ Πadm
X .O n
the other hand, since the automorphism of Π adm
X given by conjugation by η must induce
the identity on ΠSlog ,a n dΠ Slog clearly has trivial center, it thus follows that the image
of η in ΠSlog is trivial. Thus, η ∈ Δ Xlog , as desired.
Now let us denote by IsomSlog (Xlog,(X′)log) the set of Slog-isomorphisms of log
schemes between Xlog and (X′)log. Next, let us consider the set IsomΠSlog (Πadm
X ,Πadm
X′ )
of isomorphisms Πadm
X ∼= Πadm
X′ that preserve and induce the identity on the quotient ΠSlog .
Then given α, α′ ∈ IsomΠSlog (Πadm
X ,Πadm
X′ ), we regard α ∼ α′ if and only if there exists
an η ∈ Δ Xlog such that
α(η· π · η−1)= α′(π)
for all π ∈ Πadm
X . The resulting set of equivalence classes will be denoted
IsomGO
ΠSlog (Πadm
X ,Πadm
X′ )
Here, “ GO” stands for “geometrically outer.” Now observe that it is clear that inner
automorphisms induced by elements of ΔXlog do not aﬀect the RT-degree. Thus, it makes
sense to consider
IsomGORT
ΠSlog (Πadm
X ,Πadm
X′ ) ⊆ IsomGO
ΠSlog (Πadm
X ,Πadm
X′ )
that is, the classes of isomorphisms α whose RT-degree is equal to 1.
Thus, in summary, we have proven (at least under the assumption (*)) the following
result:
Theorem 7.2: Let Slog
∞ → Slog be as in Deﬁnition 2.7. Let Xlog → Slog and (X′)log →
Slog be stable log-curves (equipped with base-points x ∈ X(k) and x′ ∈ X′(k)), such that
at least one of X or X′ is not smooth over k. Then the natural map
IsomSlog (Xlog,(X′)log) → IsomGORT
ΠSlog (Πadm
X ,Πadm
X′ )
28

is bijective.
Proof: It remains to deal with the case where the simplifying assumption (*) is not
satisﬁed. But let us note that given an arbitrary Xlog as in the statement of the Theorem,
there is always a ﬁnite orderly covering Y log → Xlog such that Y satisﬁes (*). Moreover,
any admissible covering (with rational nodes) of Y will clearly still satisfy (*). Thus, it is
clear that we may takeY log → Xlog such that the corresponding (via αΠ :Π adm
X ∼= Πadm
X′ )
(Y ′)log → (X′)log is such that Y ′ also satisﬁes (*). Then one concludes the Theorem by
descent. ⃝
Just as in [Tama], if ΔXlog is center-free, then one can rewrite Theorem 7.2 in terms
of outer automorphisms. For this, we need the following
Lemma 7.3 : The group Δ Xlog is center-free.
Proof: The proof is formally the same as that given in [Tama],§1, for the case where X
is smooth over k. The only facts that one needs to check are:
(1) The pro-p-quotient Δp
Xlog of Δ Xlog is free.
(2) There exists an open subgroup H ⊆ Δ Xlog for which Hp is nonabelian.
We begin by checking (1). First note that H2
´et(X
k, Fp) = 0. Indeed, this follows immedi-
ately from writing out the long exact sequence associated to
0 −→ Fp −→ Ga
1−F
−→ Ga −→ 0
(where “ F” is the Frobenius morphism). Thus, for all ﬁnite ´ etale coverings Y → X
k,
we also have H2
´et(Y, Fp) = 0. It thus follows that H2(Δ p
Xlog , Fp) ∼= H2(Δ p
X, Fp)=
H2
´et(X
k, Fp) = 0. (Here we use the elementary fact that the natural surjection Δ p
Xlog →
Δ p
X is an isomorphism.) On the other hand, it is a well-known fact from group-theory
([Shatz], Chapter III, §3, Proposition 2.3) that this implies that Δ p
Xlog is free. This com-
pletes the veriﬁcation of (1). As for (2), since the smooth case is already discussed in
[Tama], §1, we shall concentrate here on the case when X is singular. Then it suﬃces
to note the existence of an orderly covering of X
log
k whose dual graph has a nonabelian
fundamental group. But the existence of such a covering follows immediately from simple
combinatorial considerations. ⃝
If G
1 and G2 are two topological groups, let us denote by Isom(G1,G2) the set of
continuous isomorphisms G1 ∼= G2. Let us denote by Out(G1,G2) the set of equivalence
classes of Isom(G1,G2), where we consider two isomorphisms equivalent if they diﬀer by
an inner automorphism. If G1 = G2, then we shall denote Out(G1,G2)b y Out(G1).
29

If α ∈ Isom(G1,G2), then α induces an isomorphism Out(α): Out(G1) ∼= Out(G2).
Moreover, Out(α) depends only the class [α] ∈ Out(G1,G2) deﬁned by α.
Suppose that Xlog and (X′)log are as in Theorem 7.2. Let
ρX :Π Slog → Out(Δ Xlog )
be the representation arising from the extension 1 → Δ Xlog → Πadm
X → ΠSlog → 1. Note
that ρX is independent of the choice of base pointx. Similarly, we haveρX′. Let us denote
by
Outρ(Δ Xlog ,Δ(X ′)log )
the set of [α] ∈ Out(Δ Xlog ,Δ(X ′)log ) such that Out(α) ◦ρX = ρX′. Now note that we have
a natural map
IsomGO
ΠSlog (Πadm
X ,Πadm
X′ ) → Outρ(Δ Xlog ,Δ(X ′)log )
Then it follows group-theoretically (cf. [Tama]) from the fact that ΔXlog has trivial center
that this map is a bijection. Let us denote by
OutD
ρ (Δ Xlog ,Δ(X ′)log )
the image under this bijection of
IsomGORT
ΠSlog (Πadm
X ,Πadm
X′ ) ⊆ IsomGO
ΠSlog (Πadm
X ,Πadm
X′ )
(Here, the “ D” stands for “degree one.”) Thus, one can rephrase Theorem 7.2 in the
following (seemingly weaker) form:
Theorem 7.4: Let Slog
∞ → Slog be as in Deﬁnition 2.7. Let Xlog → Slog and (X′)log →
Slog be stable log-curves such that at least one of X or X′ is not smooth over k.T h e n
the natural map
IsomSlog (Xlog,(X′)log) → OutD
ρ (Δ Xlog ,Δ(X ′)log )
is bijective.
30

Section 8: Characterization of Admissible Coverings
So far, we have been working with stable curves over a ﬁnite ﬁeld. In this Section
and the next, we shift gears and consider stable curves over local ﬁelds. The purpose of
this Section is to show that given such a curve, one can characterize the quotient of the
fundamental group (of the generic curve) corresponding to admissible coverings in entirely
group-theoretic terms. The technique of proof is similar to that of Proposition 3.1, where
we characterized ´etale coverings among all admissible coverings.
Let K be a ﬁnite extension of Q
p.L e t
 K be an algebraic closure of K;l e tΓK
def
=
Gal(
K/K). Let Kunr ⊆
 K be the maximal unramiﬁed extension ofK in
 K;l e tΓunr
K ⊆ ΓK
be the corresponding closed subgroup. Let A ⊆ K (respectively, Aunr ⊆ Kunr)b et h e
ring of integers; k be the residue ﬁeld of A; S = Spec(A). Let us endow S with the log
structure deﬁned by the closed point. Let Xlog → Slog be a stable log-curve of genus g
which is generically smooth. Thus, XK → Spec(K) is a smooth curve of genus g. Choose
a base-point x ∈ X(K). Let Π XK
def
= π1(XK,x
K ) be the resulting fundamental group.
Thus, we have an exact sequence
1 → Δ XK → ΠXK → ΓK → 1
where Δ XK
def
= π1(X
K,x
K). Let Π XK → Πadm
X be the quotient (as in Deﬁnition 2.4) of
ΠXK by the intersection ⋂ H of all the co-admissible open subgroups H ⊆ ΠXK .
Let YK → XK be an abelian ´etale covering of degree p. Let us assume that YK is
geometrically connected overK. Now let us consider the following condition onYK → XK:
(*) Over Kunr, there is an inﬁnite abelian ´ etale covering ZKunr →
XKunr = XK ⊗K Kunr with Galois group Zp such that the interme-
diate covering corresponding to Zp → Fp is YKunr → XKunr .
In the next few paragraphs, we would like to show that condition (*) is equivalent to the
statement that YK → XK extends to a ﬁnite abelian ´etale covering Y → X. Indeed, the
necessity of condition (*) follows easily from well-known facts concerning the fundamental
group of X
k = X ⊗A
 k. Thus, it remains to show that condition (*) is suﬃcient.
To prove the suﬃciency of (*), we will need to review certain basic facts from [FC]
concerning the p-adic Tate module of a semi-abelian scheme over S.L e t JK → Spec(K)
be the Jacobian of XK. We shall always regard JK as equipped with its usual principal
polarization. By [FC], Chapter I, Theorem 2.6 and Proposition 2.7, it follows that JK
extends uniquely to a semi-abelian scheme J → S over S.L e tVJ
def
= Hom(Qp/Zp,J (
K))
be the p-adic Tate module of JK.T h u s ,VJ is a free Zp-module of rank 2 g, equipped
with a natural ΓK-action. In Chapter III of [FC], one ﬁnds a theory of degenerations of
semi-abelian varieties. According to this theory (more precisely: the equivalence “ Mpol”
of Corollary 7.2 of [FC], Chapter III), there exists an abelian scheme G → S, together
with a torus T → S, and an extension
31

0 → T → ˜J → G → 0
over S, such that “roughly speaking,” J is obtained as a rigid analytic quotient of ˜J by an
´etale sheaf P of free abelian groups of rank r
def
= dim(T/S )o n S. (Caution: Our choice
of notation diﬀers somewhat from that of [FC].) Let V˜J
def
= Hom(Qp/Zp, ˜J(
K)) be the
p-adic Tate module of ˜JK.T h u s , i fd = dim(G/S), then V˜J is a free Zp-module of rank
r +2 d. Note that the ´etale sheaf P may also be regarded as a free abelian group of rank
r equipped with a ΓK-action. Let PZp
def
= P ⊗Z Zp. Then, according to Corollary 7.3 of
[FC], Chapter III, we have an exact sequence of ΓK-modules:
0 → V˜J → VJ → PZp → 0
Let VG
def
= Hom(Qp/Zp,G(
K)) (respectively, VT
def
= Hom(Qp/Zp,T (
K))) be the p-adic
Tate module of GK (respectively, TK). Then V˜J itself ﬁts into another exact sequence of
ΓK-modules:
0 → VT → V˜J → VG → 0
Next let us consider the Γ K-module VG.L e t a be the p-rank of the abelian variety
Gk
def
= G ⊗A k over k. Then, as is well-known, there is a free Zp-module VGord of rank a
equipped with an unramiﬁed ΓK-action such that we have exact sequences of ΓK-modules:
0 → V ′
G → VG → VGord → 0
and
0 → V ∨
Gord (1) → V ′
G → VGss → 0
Here, the “(1)” is a Tate twist, and by “unramiﬁed action” we mean that Γunr
K acts trivially.
Thus, VGss is the “supersingular part” of the representation VG. Let us denote by VJet
the quotient of VJ by Ker(V˜J → VGord ) ⊆ V˜J ⊆ VJ .T h u s ,VJet is a free Zp-module of
rank r + a, equipped with a natural unramiﬁed Γ K-action. Let VJmt ⊆ V˜J ⊆ VJ be the
inverse image ofV ∨
Gord (1) (⊆ VG) under the projection V˜J → VG. Note that the submodule
VJmt ⊆ VJ is dual to the quotient VJ → VJet under the bilinear form on VJ arising from
the canonical polarization of J.
Now we would like to take a closer look at the ΓK-module VGss . First, recall that the
ΓK-module VG is crystalline. This fact is well-known from the general theory of Galois
representations arising from p-adic ´etale cohomology groups of varieties (see, e.g., [FC],
Chapter VI, §6, for a brief review of this theory, as well as a list of further references). Let
32

K0 ⊆ K be the maximal unramiﬁed extension of Qp in K.T h e nVG is (say, covariantly)
“associated” to a ﬁltered module with Frobenius action ( M,F ·(M),ΦM ), where M is a
K0-vector space, ΦM : M → M is a semilinear automorphism, and F ·(M) is a ﬁltration
of M ⊗K0 K. It then follows from the above exact sequences that VGss is also crystalline,
and is associated to a ﬁltered module with Frobenius action ( Mss,F ·(Mss),ΦMss )w h i c h
is a subquotient of ( M,F ·(M),ΦM ). Moreover, since VGss was constructed as the “su-
persingular part of VG,” it follows that the Frobenius action ΦMss on Mss is topologically
nilpotent. Now we have the following crucial
Lemma 8.1 : Any Γunr
K -equivariant Zp-linear morphism ψ : V˜J → Zp (where Zp is
equipped with the trivial Γunr
K -action) factors through the quotient V˜J → VGord .
Proof: First, note that sinceT is a torus, andKunr contains only ﬁnitely manypth power
roots of unity, the restriction ofψ to VT must be zero. Thus, ψ factors through VG. Denote
the resulting morphism VG → Zp by ψ′. By the same argument, the restriction of ψ′ to
V ∨
Gord (1) must be zero. Thus, we obtain a Γ unr
K -equivariant morphism ψGss : VGss → Zp.
But since VGss is crystalline, it follows from the basic theory of crystalline representations
that ψGss deﬁnes a Frobenius-equivariant, Kunr-linear morphism ψMss : Mss ⊗K0 Kunr →
Kunr. (Here, Kunr is equipped with the trivial Frobenius action.) On the other hand, it
follows from the topological nilpotence of Φ Mss that ψMss must be zero. Thus, ψGss is
also zero. This completes the proof. ⃝
Now let us return to the abelian covering YK → XK of degree p discussed above.
Suppose that this covering satisﬁes condition (*). Then there exists a covering ZKunr →
XKunr as in (*). Moreover, since VJ = Hom(ΔXK , Zp(1)), it follows thatZKunr → XKunr
deﬁnes a Zp-linear morphism κ : Zp(1) → VJ which is Γunr
K -equivariant. By taking the
dual to κ (and using the fact that the polarization of J gives an isomorphism of VJ with
its Cartier dual), we obtain a Γunr
K -equivariant morphism κ∨ : VJ → Zp. Thus, by Lemma
8.1, it follows that κ∨ factors through VJet .I np a r t i c u l a r ,κ factors through VJmt .O nt h e
other hand, it is clear that Zp-coverings arising from morphisms Zp(1) → VJmt extend to
´etale coverings of XAunr . Thus, in particular, it follows that YK → XK extends to a ﬁnite
´etale covering Y → X. Thus, we have proven the following result:
Lemma 8.2 : Let YK → XK be an abelian ´etale covering of degree p. Let us assume
that YK is geometrically connected over K.T h e n YK → XK extends to a ﬁnite ´etale
covering Y → X if and only if YK → XK satisﬁes condition (*) above.
Next, we would like to consider more general coveringsYK → XK. We begin with the
following
Lemma 8.3 : Let ψK : YK → XK be a ﬁnite ´etale covering such thatYK is geometrically
connected over K. Suppose, moreover, that YK arises from a stable curve Y → S over S.
Then ψK extends to a proper surjective morphism ψ : Y → X.
33

Proof: Note that if ψ ⊗A K = ψK,t h e nψ will automatically be proper and domi-
nant, hence surjective. Thus, it suﬃces to show the existence of such a ψ. Let us ﬁrst
show the existence of such a ψ under the additional assumption that Xk is sturdy.N o w
it follows from the general theory of stable curves that there exists a semi-stable curve
Y
′ → S equipped with a birational (blow-up) morphism Y ′ → Y such that Y ′ is regu-
lar. Moreover, it follows from the general theory of “elimination of indeterminacy” for
regular two-dimensional schemes ([Lipman], Lemma 3.1) that the rational map fromY ′ to
X deﬁned by ψK becomes a morphism over some Y ′′,w h e r eY ′′ is obtained from Y ′ by
blowing up points. Denote the resulting morphism by ψ′′ : Y ′′ → X. On the other hand,
for E ⊆ Y ′′
k ⊆ Y ′′ such that E ∼= P1
k, it follows from the sturdiness assumption onXk that
ψ′′|E is constant. It thus follows that ψ′′ factors through Y , as desired.
Now let us prove the result in general (without the assumption that Xk is sturdy).
First, observe that by descent, it suﬃces to prove the result after replacing K by a ﬁnite
extension of K. Thus, we may assume that there exists a Galois admissible covering
θX : X′ → X (over S) such that X′
k is sturdy. Pulling back ( θX )K to YK, one sees that
one obtains a ﬁnite ´etale covering Y ′
K → YK which extends to a Galois multi-admissible
covering θY : Y ′ → Y . On the other hand, if we pull-backψK to X′, we obtain a morphism
ψ′
K : Y ′
K → X′
K. Moreover, since X′
k is sturdy, it follows from the ﬁrst paragraph of this
proof that ψ′
K extends to a morphism ψ′ : Y ′ → X′. Thus, by composing ψ′ with θX,w e
obtain a morphism φ : Y ′ → X whose restriction to Y ′
K is given by taking the composing
of (θY )K : Y ′
K → YK with ψK. Now, let us note that since θY : Y ′ → Y is an admissible
covering, it is, in particular,ﬁnite .T h u s ,i fG is the Galois group ofY ′
K over YK, it follows
(from Zariski’s main theorem) that OY is obtained from OY ′ by taking G-invariants.
Hence, φ : Y ′ → X factors through a morphism Y → X which extends ψK, as desired. ⃝
Remark: As pointed out by the referee, one can also prove this Lemma (without reducing
to the sturdy case) by considering the number of points at which a ( −1)-curve in Y ′′
(notation of the above proof) intersects other irreducible components of the special ﬁber
of Y ′′. The author ﬁnds the proof involving sturdiness to be more transparent, but this is
a matter of taste.
Let ψK : YK → XK be a ﬁnite Galois ´etale covering (with Galois group G) such that
YK is geometrically connected over K,a n dYK has a stable extension Y → S over S.L e t
us also assume that ψK satisﬁes the following condition:
(† )L e tH ⊆ G be any subgroup with H ∼= Z/pZ,a n dl e tYK → ZK be
the subcovering corresponding to H.T h e nZK has a stable extension
Z → S over S, and, moreover, YK → ZK extends to a ﬁnite ´ etale
covering Y → Z over S.
Let ℘ ∈ Y be a height one prime arising from an irreducible component of the special
ﬁber Yk. Then we claim that the inertia subgroup I℘ ⊆ G is trivial. (Here, by the inertia
subgroup, we mean the subgroup of elements of G that ﬁx ℘ and act trivially on k(℘).)
34

Indeed, ﬁrst note that sinceY is smooth overS at ℘, there cannot be any tame ramiﬁcation,
so I℘ must be a p-group. If I℘ is nontrivial, then it contains a subgroup H ⊆ I℘ such
that H ∼= Z/pZ. But then the statement that H acts trivially on k(℘) clearly contradicts
condition († ). Thus, I℘ must be trivial, as claimed.
Now let ℘ ∈ X be a height one prime arising from an irreducible component of the
special ﬁber Xk. It follows from the preceding paragraph that ℘ is unramiﬁed in K(Y )
(the function ﬁeld of Y ). Thus, if we let Y ′ be the normalization of X in YK, it follows
that Y ′ → X is ﬁnite over all of X,a n d´etale over the complement of the nodes of X (by
purity). Then it follows by the same argument as that used in the proof of Lemma 3.12
of [Mzk] that Y ′ → X must be an admissible covering. In particular, Y ′ is a stable curve
over S,s o Y = Y ′. Thus, it follows from Lemma 8.2 and the above discussion that we
have proven the following:
Proposition 8.4: The admissible quotient ΠXK → Πadm
X can be recovered entirely
group-theoretically from ΠXK → ΓK.
Proof: Indeed, clearly (by replacing K by a ﬁnite, tamely ramiﬁed extension of K)i t
suﬃces to show that given an open normal subgroup H ⊆ ΠXK that surjects onto ΓK,t h e
issue of whether or not the resulting covering YK → XK is pre-admissible can be settled
group-theoretically. But, by the above discussion, YK → XK is pre-admissible if and only
if YK and XK admit stable extensions over S (which is well-known, by the criterion of
Serre-Tate, to be a group-theoretic condition), and, moreover, († ) is satisﬁed. On the other
hand, by Lemma 8.2, († ) is also a group-theoretic condition. This completes the proof. ⃝
Section 9: Consequences for Curves over Local Fields
We retain the notation of the preceding Section. Thus, in particular, we have a
stable log-curve Xlog → Slog.L e t K∞ ⊆
 K be the maximal tamely ramiﬁed extension
of K;l e tΓ tm
K
def
= Gal(K∞ /K). Thus, we have a natural surjection Γ K → Γtm
K .W e
saw in Proposition 8.4 that one can recover the admissible quotient ΠXK → Πadm
X (hence
also the surjection Π adm
X → Γtm
K ) group-theoretically from Π XK → ΓK. Suppose that
(X′)log → Slog is also a stable log-curve over Slog. Let us denote (as in Theorem 7.2) by
IsomGO
ΓK (ΠXK ,ΠX′
K
)
the set of equivalence classes of isomorphisms ΠXK → ΠX′
K
that are compatible with the
surjections to ΓK, modulo inner automorphisms arising from elements of the geometric
fundamental group ΔXK ⊆ ΠXK . Finally, let us denote byslog the special pointSpec(k) ⊆
S equipped with the log structure pulled back fromSlog. We would like to use Proposition
8.4 and Theorem 7.2 to obtain information on the special ﬁber of Xlog, but before we can
do this, we need to clear up some technical issues concerning the notion of “degree.”
35

Thus, suppose that we are given an isomorphism α :Π XK → ΠX′
K
over ΓK.B y
Proposition 8.4, this isomorphism induces an isomorphism αadm :Π adm
X → Πadm
X′ over
Πslog . Let us denote the RT-degree of αadm (as discussed in Section 7) by dRT .W ew o u l d
like to show that in this case (i.e., when αadm arises from α), dRT is automatically equal
to 1. In order to do this, we will have to look at several other notions of “degree” and
show that they all coincide. From this, it will follow that d
RT =1 .
First, let us consider the p-adic fundamental class of XK:
ηX,p ∈ H2(Δ XK , Zp(1))
(i.e., the ﬁrst Chern class of a line bundle of degree one on X
K). We also have the l-adic
fundamental class of XK:
ηX,l ∈ H2(Δ XK , Zl(1))
for primes l diﬀerent from p. Also, we have similar classes ηX′,p and ηX′,l for X′.L e tu s
denote by
dp ∈ Zp
× (respectively, d l ∈ Zl
×)
the unique unit such that ηX,p (respectively, ηX,l)i st a k e nt odp · ηX′,p (respectively,
dl · ηX′,l). Now we propose to prove that
dp = dRT = dl ∈ Q
Since dRT ∈ pZ,a n ddp ∈ Zp
×, it will follow immediately that dRT =1 .
Note that from the point of view of showing dp = dRT = dl, we may always replace
XK by some ﬁnite ´etale covering ofXK, since we know how the fundamental class behaves
with respect to coverings (namely, it simply gets multiplied by the degree of the covering).
We shall see below in the proof of Theorem 9.2 that by replacing X
K by such a covering,
we may assume that Xk is singular, and, moreover, that its graph is not a tree.W e s h a l l
assume this until the end of the following proof and statement of Lemma 9.1.
Let us ﬁrst consider the l-adic theory. Let HZ be the ﬁrst singular cohomology group
of the dual graph of X
k. (Recall that the dual graph is the graph whose vertices (respec-
tively, edges) are the irreducible components (respectively, nodes) ofX
k.) Note that HZ is
equipped with a naturalGal(
k/k)-action, hence a natural ΓK-action. Let HZl
def
= HZ ⊗Z Zl.
Now in Section 8, we considered the p-adic Tate module of JK, but since the theory of
[FC] applies to the l-adic Tate modules as well, we can deﬁne similar exact sequences to
those discussed in Section 8 in the l-adic case. Thus, we let V l
J be the l-adic Tate module
of JK. Moreover, we obtain a Γ K-equivariant quotient V l
J → PZl
def
= P ⊗Z Zl,a sw e l l
36

as a submodule V l
T ⊆ V l
J . Here, we shall not regard PZl as the tensor product of some
Z-module P with Zl, but rather solely in its capacity as a quotient of V l
J .B yt h et h e o r y
of [FC], Chapter III, it follows that as ΓK-modules, we have a natural isomorphism
ζl : HZl (1) ∼= V l
T
We shall identify these two modules viaζl. This identiﬁcation is justiﬁed by the following
observation: From our theory of irreducible components and nodes (Sections 1 and 5), it
follows that α (or, more precisely, αadm) induces a natural isomorphism αHZ : HZ ∼= H′
Z
(where H′
Z is the object obtained from X′ that corresponds to HZ). Moreover, if we use
primes to denote objects obtained from X′ that correspond to various objects obtained
from X, then we have a commutative diagram
HZl (1)
ζl
−→ V l
T
⏐⏐
↓
αHZ ⊗ Zl(1)
⏐⏐
↓
H
′
Zl (1)
ζ′
l
−→ (V l
T )′
where the vertical arrows are those naturally induced byα. It is the commutativity of this
diagram that justiﬁes the identiﬁcation (based on ζl) proposed above.
Now we have an exact sequence 0 → V l
˜J
→ V l
J → PZl → 0 (analogous to the p-
adic version of this exact sequence which was reviewed in Section 8). Clearly, it may
be recovered group-theoretically from Π XK → ΓK.I n p a r t i c u l a r ,PZl may be recovered
group-theoretically from Π XK → ΓK. Next recall from the theory of [FC], Chapter III,
that there is a Z-bilinear pairing B : HZ × HomZ(P, Z) → K×/A× = Z which induces an
injection of modules HZ ↪→ P, which becomes an isomorphism over Q. By Corollary 7.3
of [FC], Chapter III, by considering the various extension classes involved and applying
Kummer theory, the pairing
B
l
def
= B ⊗ Zl : HZl × P ∨
Zl → Zl
may be recovered from the extension 0 → V l
˜J
→ V l
J → PZl → 0. This pairing determines
an injection HZl ↪→ PZl, which becomes an isomorphism over Ql. Thus, we may recover
(group-theoretically from ΠXK → ΓK) the injection HZ ↪→ PZl.
Now, let us note that V l
J = Hom(ΔXK , Zl(1)) = H1
´et(Δ XK , Zl(1)). Thus, to summa-
rize, we have an injection
HZl (1) ↪→ H1
´et(Δ XK , Zl(1))
as well as a surjection (obtained by using the isomorphismHQl
∼= PQl derived above from
B)
37

H1
´et(Δ XK , Ql) → HQl (−1)
Now, by using the cup product operation in group cohomology, we obtain
HQl ⊗Ql HQl → H2
´et(Δ XK , Ql(1))
Composing this with the natural inclusion HQ ⊗ HQ ↪→ HQl ⊗Ql HQl , we thus obtain
μl : HQ ⊗ HQ → H2
´et(Δ XK , Ql(1))
Moreover, it follows from the theory of [FC], Chapter III, that there exists a nondegen-
erate bilinear form < −, − >: HQ × HQ → Q such that for all h1,h2 ∈ HQ,w eh a v e
μl(h1,h2)= <h 1,h2 >ηX,l. Here, the bilinear form < −, − > is independent of l.
Let us denote analogous objects associated toX′ by means of primes. Thus, it follows
immediately that we have a commutative diagram
HQ ⊗ HQ
μl
−→ H2
´et(Δ XK , Ql(1))
·ηX,l
←− Zl
⏐⏐
↓
αHQ ⊗αHQ
⏐⏐
↓
H2
´et(α)
⏐⏐
↓
dl
H′
Q ⊗ H′
Q
μ′
l
−→ H2
´et(Δ X′
K
, Ql(1))
·ηX′,l
←− Zl
whose vertical morphisms are those naturally induced by α. In particular, we obtain that
(up to identifying HQ with H′
Q via αHQ ) dl· < −, − >=< −, − >′. Moreover, the l-adic
theory of the last few paragraphs goes through entirely without change in thep-adic case,
as well. Thus, we obtain dp· < −, − >=< −, − >′. In particular, (since the graph of Xk
is not a tree, HZ ̸=0 ,s o )dp = dl ∈ Q for every prime l diﬀerent from p.S i n c edl ∈ Zl
×
and dp ∈ Zp
×, we thus obtain that dp = dl = ±1.
On the other hand, the relationship betweendl and dRT can be established as follows.
First note that, as we saw in Section 5, there is a natural combinatorial (perfect) duality
(unrelated to the duality deﬁned by the formB) between HZl and PZl. (Indeed, in Section
5, the discussion concerning “ Lr”a n d“KY ”s h o w st h a tPZl is the ﬁrst homology group
of the dual graph of X
k (with Zl-coeﬃcients), whereas HZl is – by deﬁnition – the ﬁrst
cohomology group of the dual graph of X
k (with Zl-coeﬃcients).) Let us denote this
duality by Dcom
l : HZl ⊗Zl PZl → Zl. Moreover, relative to the natural combinatorial
isomorphisms HZl
∼= H′
Zl and PZl
∼= P ′
Zl (obtained from considering the isomorphisms
between the graphs of X
k and X′
k induced by αadm), we have Dcom
l =( Dcom
l )′ (since
“everything is combinatorial”). Thus, we shall identify HZl , PZl and Dcom
l with their
primed counterparts in what follows.
Now recall the natural inclusionHZl (1) ⊆ H1(Δ XK , Zl(1)), and the natural surjection
H1(Δ XK , Zl) → PZl (−1). Using the cup product in group cohomology, we thus obtain a
38

pairing HZl(1) ⊗ PZl (−1) = HZl ⊗ PZl → Zl · ηX,l. It is tautological that this pairing is
simply Dcom
l (−, −)·ηX,l. On the other hand, by recalling the deﬁnition ofdRT (in terms of
inertia groups) and the fact that the quotient V l
J → PZl pertains to the inertia, it follows
immediately that we have a commutative diagram
HZl (1) ⊗ PZl (−1)
∪
−→ H2
´et(Δ XK , Ql(1))
·ηX,l
←− Zl
⏐⏐
↓
idHZl
⊗(dRT ·idPZl
)
⏐⏐
↓
H2
´et(α)
⏐⏐
↓
dl
HZl (1) ⊗ PZl (−1)
∪
−→ H2
´et(Δ X′
K
, Ql(1))
·ηX′,l
←− Zl
It thus follows that dl = dRT .S i n c edRT is positive, we thus obtain the following
Lemma 9.1 : We have dp = dl = dRT =1 .I n p a r t i c u l a r ,ηX,p (respectively, ηX,l)i s
taken to ηX′,p (respectively, ηX′,l)b y α.
We are now ready to prove the following result:
Theorem 9.2: Let K be a ﬁnite extension of Qp;l e tA ⊆ K be its ring of integers;
and let Slog be Spec(A) equipped with the log structure deﬁned by the closed point. Let
Xlog → Slog and (X′)log → Slog be stable log-curves (equipped with base-pointsx ∈ X(K)
and x′ ∈ X′(K)). Then there exists a morphism
ξk : IsomGO
ΓK (ΠXK ,ΠX′
K
) → Isomslog (Xlog
k ,(X′)log
k )
that makes the following diagram commute
IsomGO
ΓK (ΠXK ,ΠX′
K
) −→ IsomGO
Γtm
K
(Πadm
X ,Πadm
X′ )
⏐⏐
↓
ξk
⏐
⏐
↓
id
Isomslog (Xlog
k ,(X′)log
k ) −→ IsomGO
Γtm
K
(Πadm
X ,Πadm
X′ )
(where the horizontal morphisms are the natural ones).
Proof: This Theorem follows immediately from Theorem 7.2 (together with Proposition
8.4 and Lemma 9.1) if it is the case that at least one of Xk or X′
k is not smooth over k.
Thus, it remains to consider the case when both Xk and X′
k are smooth over k.I n t h i s
case, let us (after possibly replacing K by a ﬁnite extension of K, which won’t aﬀect the
ﬁnal result) assume that there exists a ﬁnite, abelian, ´etale covering YK → XK of degree p
such that YK extends to a stable curve overS.L e tG be the Galois group of YK over XK.
By Lemma 8.3, YK → XK extends to a morphism Y → X. Moreover, by the review of the
structure of VJ given in Section 8, it is easy to see that one can always choose YK → XK
so that Y → X is not ´etale.
39

Then I claim that Yk is singular. Indeed, suppose that Yk is smooth over k.L e t
℘ ∈ X be the prime deﬁned by the special ﬁber. Then ℘ must be ramiﬁed in K(Y ) (the
function ﬁeld of Y ), for if it were not ramiﬁed, it is easy to see that Y → X would be
´etale. On the other hand, since X and Y are both smooth over A, the statement that ℘ is
ramiﬁed in K(Y )m e a n st h a tK(Yk) is an inseparable extension of K(Xk) (of degree p).
But this means that the genus of Yk (and hence of YK) is the same as that of Xk.B u t
since YK → XK is ´etale of degree p, this is absurd. This completes the proof of the claim.
Now suppose that we are given an isomorphism φΠ :Π XK → ΠX′
K
that respects the
surjections to ΓK. Then the covering YK → XK corresponds, via φ, to some covering
Y ′
K → X′
K. Now we can apply the part of the Theorem that has already been established
to Y log and (Y ′)log. We thus obtain an isomorphism φY : Y log
k
∼= (Y ′)log
k (over slog). Now
it is easy to see that the irreducible componentC of Y log
k that maps ﬁnitely to Xlog
k can be
characterized group-theoretically as the unique component such that abelian ´etale coverings
of Xlog
k of degree l (where l is prime to p) pull back to nontrivial coverings ofC.M o r e o v e r ,
note that nonsplit admissible coverings of Xlog
k pull-back to nonsplit admissible coverings
of Y log
k . Thus, one sees that φY induces a unique isomorphism φX : Xlog
k
∼= (X′)log
k such
that the morphism induced byφX on Πadm’s is compatible with the morphism induced on
Πadm’s by φΠ. This completes the proof of the Theorem. ⃝
Once Theorem 9.2 is in hand, the next natural step is to try to show that the isomor-
phism of Xlog
k
∼= (X′)log
k obtained from some φΠ :Π XK → ΠX′
K
lifts to an isomorphism
Xlog ∼= (X′)log over Slog. Unfortunately, we do not succeed in doing this in general. The
problem is as follows: Let GK be the p-divisible group over K deﬁned by the Γ K-module
Hom(Qp/Zp,VJ ). Then the exact sequence 0 → V˜J → VJ → P ⊗ (Qp/Zp) → 0o fΓ K
modules gives rise to an exact sequence of p-divisible groups over K:
0 → ˜GK →G K →G P
K → 0
Moreover, it follows from the theory of [FC], Chapter III, that ˜GK and GP
K extend, respec-
tively, to p-divisible groups ˜G and GP over S. (Here, ˜G is the p-divisible group obtained
from the semi-abelian scheme ˜J.) For readers used to this language, we note that it also
follows from the theory of [FC], Chapter III, that GK extends to a log p-divisible group
Glog over Slog. Finally, we also have primed objects ˜G′,( GP )′, etc. arising from (X′)log.
Now let us observe that any isomorphism φΠ :Π XK → ΠX′
K
that respects the surjec-
tions to ΓK deﬁnes an isomorphism φGK : GK ∼= G′
K of p-divisible groups over K. Note
that φGK maps ˜GK into ˜G′
K, hence induces an isomorphism φ˜GK
: ˜GK ∼= ˜G′
K.M o r e o v e r ,
it follows from a theorem of Tate ([Tate]) that φ˜G extends uniquely to an isomorphism
φ˜G : ˜G ∼= ˜G′. If we tensor this isomorphism with k, we thus obtain an isomorphism
φ˜Gk
: ˜Gk ∼= ˜G′
k
40

On the other hand, note that ˜Gk is the p-divisible group associated to ˜Jk.M o r e o v e r ,
since ˜Jk is the identity component of the Picard scheme of Xk, the isomorphism φX :
Xlog
k
∼= (X′)log
k thus induces an isomorphism Pic0(Xk)= ˜Jk ∼= Pic0(X′
k)= ˜J ′
k, hence an
isomorphism
φPic0(X) : ˜Gk ∼= ˜G′
k
Then the following fundamental question arises:
Question 9.3: Is φ˜Gk
equal to φPic0(X)?
Remark: If one can prove that the answer to Question 9.3 is aﬃrmative, then it follows
formally from the techniques discussed in this paper that one can prove a version of the
Grothendieck Conjecture for hyperbolic curves over local ﬁelds. Unfortunately, however,
because we are only able to settle Question 9.3 in the aﬃrmative under the additional
assumption that the abelian variety G
k is ordinary (see Lemma 9.4 below), we are only
able to prove (in the context of this paper) a relatively weak version of the Grothendieck
Conjecture for hyperbolic curves over local ﬁelds (see Theorem 9.7 below). In fact, a very
strong local version of the Grothendieck Conjecture is proven in [Mzk2]. The existence of
such a local result impliesa posteriorithat the answer to Question 9.3 is always aﬃrmative.
Nevertheless, it is still of interest to what extent Question 9.3 can be settled within the
context of the present paper, and so we proceed to do this below.
Now we would like to settle Question 9.3 in the aﬃrmative under the assumption that
G
k is an ordinary abelian variety.
Lemma 9.4 : Suppose that in the exact sequence of groups 0 → T → ˜J → G → 0
associated to the Jacobian J of X, the abelian variety Gk is ordinary.T h e n w e h a v e
φ˜Gk
= φPic0(X).
Proof: Indeed, in this case, the p-divisible group ˜Gk admits a canonical splitting
˜Gk = ˜Gmt
k ⊕ ˜Get
k
into multiplicative and ´etale parts. Since both φ˜Gk
and φPic0(X) clearly respect this split-
ting, it suﬃces to show that they agree on each of the direct summands. Note, moreover,
that ˜Gmt
k lifts naturally to a multiplicative p-divisible group ˜Gmt ⊆ ˜G. Also, the submod-
ule of V˜J ⊆ VJ deﬁned by ˜Gmt
K is simply VJmt .B u t VJmt ⊆ VJ = H1(Δ XK , Zp(1)) is the
portion of H1(Δ XK , Zp(1)) that arises from ´etale coverings of X (or, equivalently, Xk).
Thus, the fact that φ˜Gk
= φPic0(X) on ˜Gmt
k follows from the commutativity of the diagram
in the statement of Theorem 9.2.
41

Let G be the p-divisible group over S arising from the abelian scheme G → S.T h u s ,
we have a surjection ˜G→G .M o r e o v e r ,φ˜Gk
and φPic0(X) induce isomorphisms Gk ∼= G′
k.
Let us refer to an isomorphism of an object with its Cartier as dual as a polarization
of the object. Now observe that we have two polarizations of Gk, one arising from the
polarization of VJ , and the other arising from regarding ˜Jk as Pic0(Xk). By the general
theory of semi-abelian schemes (as discussed in [FC]), it follows that these polarizations
of G
k coincide. Moreover, by Lemma 9.1, φ˜GK
is compatible with the ﬁrst of the two
(coinciding) polarizations ofGk, while, by deﬁnition, φPic0(X) is compatible with the second
of the two (coinciding) polarizations of Gk. In particular, the fact that φ˜Gk
= φPic0(X) on
˜Gmt
k implies that φ˜Gk
= φPic0(X) on ˜Get
k , hence on all of ˜Gk. This completes the proof of
the Lemma. ⃝
Now let us suppose that we are in a situation where φ˜Gk
= φPic0(X). Thus, it follows
that we have an isomorphism φ˜Jk
: ˜Jk ∼= ˜J ′
k such that the resulting isomorphism on p-
divisible groups lifts to an isomorphism φ˜G : ˜G ∼= ˜G′ over S. By “Grothendieck-Messing
theory” (see, e.g., [FC], Chapter I, §3, for a review), it thus follows that φ˜Jk
extends to a
unique isomorphism φ˜J : ˜J ∼= ˜J ′ compatible with φ˜G. Moreover, one checks easily that the
rest of the “semi-abelian degeneration data” forJ (as in [FC], Chapter III,§2) is determined
by the extension 0 → V˜J → VJ → PZp → 0( a n di t sl-adic counterparts, for l ̸= p), as well
as other data that we have already seen to be group-theoretically characterizable. Thus,
we conclude (by the natural categorical equivalences of [FC], Chapter III, Corollary 7.2)
that we have an isomorphism
φ
J : J ∼= J ′
which is uniquely determined by the condition that it is compatible with φGK .M o r e o v e r ,
φJ is compatible (by Lemma 9.1) with the canonical polarizations on J and J ′. Thus, by
Torelli’s theorem ([Milne], Theorem 12.1), we conclude that there is an isomorphism
ψ : X ∼= X′
such that the isomorphism induced byψ on Jacobians is ±φJ. Note that ψ always extends
to a unique log-isomorphism ψlog : Xlog ∼= (X′)log.
Deﬁnition 9.5: Let us call X ordinary if Gk is an ordinary abelian variety. Let us
call X equi-hyperelliptic if either (i) XK is hyperelliptic; or (ii) Xlog
k does not admit an
slog-automorphism that induces −1 on Jk.
Note that if p is odd, then (ii) is equivalent to the condition that Xlog
k not arise as a
logarithmic degeneration of a smooth hyperelliptic curve. (Here, by “logarithmic degener-
ation,” we mean that it arises as the special ﬁber of some generically smooth, generically
42

hyperelliptic log-curve over a trait equipped with the log structure deﬁned by the special
point.) Indeed, that (ii) implies this condition is clear. On the other hand, suppose that
this condition is satisﬁed, but that there exists an automorphism α of Xlog
k that induces
−1o n Jk.T h u s ,α2 = id. But then it is easy to see that by forming the quotient ofXlog
k by
the group < 1,α> , we can exhibit Xlog
k (up to adding some more marked points to Xlog
k
and modifying the log structure accordingly) as an admissible double covering of a stable
log-curve curve of genus 0. In particular, Xlog
k will then be a logarithmic degeneration of
a smooth hyperelliptic curve, as desired.
Moreover, we have the following
Lemma 9.6 : If X is equi-hyperelliptic, then we can choose ψ to be compatible with
φJ.
Proof: Indeed, this is clear in case (i) (of the deﬁnition of “equi-hyperelliptic”) since
then the hyperelliptic involution ofXK (which induces −1 on the Jacobian) extends to an
automorphism of X, so we can always adjust ψ accordingly. On the other hand, suppose
that we are in case (ii), and that ψ is compatible with −φJ.T h e nψk diﬀers from the
isomorphism φX : Xlog
k
∼= (X′)log
k by an automorphism α of Xlog
k that induces −1o n Jk,
thus violating the assumption that X is equi-hyperelliptic. This completes the proof. ⃝
If Xlog
k does not satisfy condition (ii) of Deﬁnition 9.5, let α be the (necessarily
unique) oﬀending automorphism. Let ι∈ IsomGO
Γtm
K
(Πadm
X ,Πadm
X ) be the (equivalence class
of) isomorphism(s) induced by α. Note that by Theorem 7.2, if IsomΓtm
K
(Πadm
X ,Πadm
X′ )i s
nonempty, then Xlog
k has an oﬀending automorphism if and only if (X′)log
k does. Now let
us deﬁne
IsomGOH
Γtm
K
(Πadm
X ,Πadm
X′ )
to be the set of equivalence classes of elements ofIsomGO
Γtm
K
(Πadm
X ,Πadm
X′ ), where two classes
of isomorphisms Πadm
X ∼= Πadm
X′ are considered equivalent
(1) if they are equal or diﬀer at most by composition withι(when α exists);
(2) if they are equal (when α does not exist).
It is easy to show that this equivalence relation is well-deﬁned, and compatible with the
equivalence relation used to deﬁne IsomGO from Isom.
Now we are ready to state the strongest version of the Grothendieck Conjecture that
we are able to prove (in the context of the present paper) in the local case.
43

Theorem 9.7: Let K be a ﬁnite extension of Qp;l e tA ⊆ K be its ring of integers;
and let Slog be Spec(A) equipped with the log structure deﬁned by the closed point. Let
Xlog → Slog and (X′)log → Slog be stable log-curves (equipped with base-pointsx ∈ X(K)
and x′ ∈ X′(K)). Suppose that at least one of X and X′ is ordinary. Then there exists a
(not necessarily unique) morphism
ξS : IsomGO
ΓK (ΠXK ,ΠX′
K
) → IsomSlog (Xlog,(X′)log)
that makes the following diagram commute
IsomGO
ΓK (ΠXK ,ΠX′
K
) −→ IsomGO
Γtm
K
(Πadm
X ,Πadm
X′ )
⏐⏐
↓
ξS
⏐
⏐
↓
Isom
Slog (Xlog,(X′)log) −→ IsomGOH
Γtm
K
(Πadm
X ,Πadm
X′ )
(where the morphisms other than ξS are the natural ones).
Moreover, if eitherX or X′ is equi-hyperelliptic, then one can chooseξS uniquely such
that the above diagram commutes when the projection on the right is replaced by the
identity on Isom
GO
Γtm
K
(Πadm
X ,Πadm
X′ ).
Finally, just as we derived Theorem 7.4 from Theorem 7.2, we have the following
“outer automorphism version” of Theorem 9.7: First, let us denote by
ρX :Γ K → Out(Δ XK )
the representation derived from the extension 1 → Δ XK → ΠXK → ΓK → 1. Then we
have the following
Theorem 9.8: Let K be a ﬁnite extension of Qp;l e tA ⊆ K be its ring of integers;
and let Slog be Spec(A) equipped with the log structure deﬁned by the closed point. Let
Xlog → Slog be an ordinary stable log-curve of genus g. Then the isomorphism class of
Xlog is completely determined by the isomorphism class of the representation
ρX :Γ K → Out(Δ XK )
Remark: Note that Theorem 9.8 shows that ordinary hyperbolic curves over local ﬁelds
behave quite diﬀerently from ordinary abelian varieties over local ﬁelds. Indeed, given an
ordinary elliptic curve Ek → Spec(k), it is easy to see (using the Serre-Tate theory of
liftings of ordinary abelian varieties) that there exist many mutually nonisogenous liftings
E → Spec(A)( w h e r eA = W(k)) of E
k to A, for which the representations
44

ρE :Γ K → Out(π1(E
K)) = AutˆZ(π1(E
K))
are isomorphic.
Section 10: The Main Result over Number Fields
In this Section, we prove the Grothendieck Conjecture for closed hyperbolic curves
over number ﬁelds. The only result from Section 9 (the local theory) that we will use is
Theorem 9.2; the rest of Section 9 is unnecessary. We will concentrate here on the closed
case, since the open case has already been proven in [Tama].
Let K be a ﬁnite extension of Q. Choose an algebraic closure
K of K,a n dw r i t eΓK
for Gal(
K/K). Let XK → Spec(K) be a smooth hyperbolic (i.e., of genus≥ 2) curve. (By
this, we shall always mean that XK is geometrically connected over K.) Suppose that we
are given a base-point x ∈ X(K). Let Π XK
def
= π1(XK,x
K); Δ XK
def
= π1(X
K,x
K). Thus,
we have a natural exact sequence
1 → Δ XK → ΠXK → ΓK → 1
Then we have the following result
Theorem 10.1: Let K be a ﬁnite extension of Q.L e t XK → Spec(K) and X′
K →
Spec(K) be smooth hyperbolic curves over K, equipped with base-points x ∈ X(K) and
x′ ∈ X′(K)). Then the natural map
IsomK(XK,X ′
K) → IsomGO
ΓK (ΠXK ,ΠX′
K
)
is bijective.
Proof: Pick an isomorphismα :Π XK
∼= ΠX′
K
compatible with the surjections to ΓK.L e t
A be a localization of the ring of integers of K over which XK and X′
K extend to smooth
curves X → S, X′ → S (where S = Spec(A)). Let I → S be the scheme IsomS(X,X ′)o f
isomorphisms of X with X′ over S. It is well-known that I is ﬁnite and unramiﬁed over
S. By localizing A further, we may assume that I is ´etale over S. Fix a prime number
l. By localizing A further, we may assume that l ∈ A×.L e t ℘ be a ﬁnite prime of A;
let A℘ be the completion of A at ℘. By base-changing to A℘ and applying Theorem 9.2,
we conclude that there exists a unique β ∈ I(A℘) such that the isomorphism deﬁned by
β induces the same isomorphism as α on the ﬁrst l-adic cohomology groups of X and
X′. Note that β is, in fact, deﬁned over some ﬁnite Galois extension L of K.D e n o t et h e
resulting point of I(L)b y γ. To see that γ descends to K, it suﬃces to note that γ is
the unique point of I(L) that induces the right isomorphism on the H1(−, Zl)’s. Thus, γ
45

descends to K. Thus, we obtain a K-isomorphism ψ : XK ∼= X′
K corresponding to γ.T o
see that the isomorphism Π XK
∼= Π′
X induced by ψ coincides with the original α (up to
an inner automorphism induced by an element of Δ XK ), we apply the same argument as
that given in [Tama] or the discussion preceding Theorem 7.2. (Note that here, we also
use the well-known fact that Γ
K has trivial center.) ⃝
Now, as usual, we denote by
ρX :Γ K → Out(Δ XK )
the representation derived from the extension 1 → Δ XK → ΠXK → ΓK → 1. Just as in
the discussion preceding Theorem 7.4, we may formOutρ(Δ XK ,Δ X′
K
). Then we have the
following
Theorem 10.2: Let K be a ﬁnite extension of Q.L e t XK → Spec(K) and X′
K →
Spec(K) be smooth hyperbolic curves over K. Then the natural map
IsomK(XK,X ′
K) → Outρ(Δ XK ,Δ X′
K
)
is bijective.
Bibliography
[DM] P. Deligne and D. Mumford, The irreducibility of the space of curves of a given genus,
Publ. Math. IHES 36 (1969), pp. 75-110.
[FC] G. Faltings and C.-L. Chai,Degenerations of Abelian Varieties, Springer-Verlag, 1990.
[Fuji] K. Fujiwara, ´Etale topology to log no tetsugaku (in Japanese), Proceedings of the
Algebraic Geometry Symposium in Kinosaki, 1990.
[Lipman] J. Lipman, Desingularization of two-dimensional schemes , Ann. Math. 107 (1978),
pp. 151-207.
[Milne] J. S. Milne, Jacobian Varieties in Arithmetic Geometry by G. Cornell and J. H.
Silverman, Springer-Verlag, 1986.
[Mzk] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of the Compactiﬁcation of the Hurwitz Scheme, Publ. of
RIMS. 31, No. 3 (1995), pp. 355-441.
[Mzk2] S. Mochizuki, The Local Pro-p Grothendieck Conjecture for Hyperbolic Curves, RIMS
(Kyoto University) Preprint 1045 (1995).
46

[SGA7] A. Grothendieck et al., Groupes de Monodromie en G´eometrie Alg´ebrique, Lecture
Notes in Math. 288, Springer Verlag, 1972.
[Shatz] S. S. Shatz, Proﬁnite Groups, Arithmetic, and Geometry, Ann. of Math. Studies 67,
Princeton University Press, 1972.
[Tama] A. Tamagawa, The Grothendieck Conjecture for Aﬃne Curves, RIMS (Kyoto Univer-
sity) Preprint 1064 (1996); also, to appear in Compositio Math..
[Tate] J. Tate, p-Divisible Groups, Proceedings of a Conference on Local Fields, Driebergen,
Springer-Verlag, 1967, pp. 158-183.
[Uchi] K. Uchida, Isomorphisms of Galois groups of solvably closed Galois extensions, Ann.
of Math. 106 (1977), pp. 589-598.
47