The Local Pro-p Anabelian Geometry of Curves
by Shinichi Mochizuki
INTRODUCTION
The Anabelian Geometry of Grothendieck:
Let X be a connected scheme. Then one can associate (after Grothendieck) to X
its algebraic fundamental group π1(X). This group π1(X) is a proﬁnite group which is
uniquely determined (up to inner automorphisms) by the property that the category of
ﬁnite, discrete sets equipped with a continuous π1(X)-action is equivalent to the category
of ﬁnite ´etale coverings of X. Moreover, the assignment X ↦→ π1(X)i sa functor from the
category of connected schemes (and morphisms of schemes) to the category of proﬁnite
topological groups and continuous outer homomorphisms (i.e., continuous homomorphisms
of topological groups, where we identify any two homomorphisms that can be obtained from
one another by composition with an inner automorphism).
Now let K be a ﬁeld. Let Γ
K be the absolute Galois group of K.T h e nπ1(Spec(K))
may be identiﬁed with Γ K.L e t XK be a variety (i.e., a geometrically integral separated
scheme of ﬁnite type) over K. Then the structure morphism XK → Spec(K) deﬁnes a
natural augmentation π1(XK) → ΓK. The kernel of this morphism π1(XK) → ΓK is a
closed normal subgroup of π1(XK) – called the geometric fundamental group of XK –
which may be identiﬁed with π1(X
K)( w h e r eX
K
def
= XK ⊗K
 K). If, moreover, one ﬁxes
ap r i m en u m b e rp, then one can form the maximal pro-p quotient π1(X
K)(p) of π1(X
K).
Since the quotient π1(X
K) → π1(X
K)(p) is characteristic, it follows that the kernel of this
quotient is, in fact, a normal subgroup ofπ1(XK). The quotient of π1(XK) by this normal
subgroup will be denoted Π XK .T h u s ,ΠXK inherits a natural augmentation ΠXK → ΓK
from that of π1(XK).
Now let us consider the assignment
π1(−)K : {XK → Spec(K)} ↦→{ π1(XK) → ΓK }
This assignment deﬁnes a functor from the category CK of K-varieties (whose morphisms
are K-linear morphisms of varieties) to the category GK whose objects are proﬁnite topo-
logical groups equipped with an augmentation to ΓK, and whose morphisms are continu-
ous outer homomorphisms of topological groups that lie over Γ K. It was the intuition of
Grothendieck (see [Groth]) that:
1

For certain types of K, if one replaces CK and GK by “certain appro-
priate” subcategories C′
K and G′
K (such that π1(−)K still maps C′
K into
G′
K), then π1(−)K should be fully faithful.
Here, the “certain appropriate” subcategories C′
K for which this piece of intuition was to
hold true were tentatively assigned the appellation anabelian, while the piece of intuition
itself came to be referred to asGrothendieck’s Conjecture of Anabelian Geometry(or, sim-
ply, the “Grothendieck Conjecture,” for short). Roughly speaking, the sorts of varieties
that were thought to be likely to be “anabelian” were varieties that are “suﬃciently hyper-
bolic.” (Note that, as one can see in the case of curves, hyperbolic varieties tend to have
highly nonabelian fundamental groups, hence the term “anabelian.” In higher dimensions,
however, things are not so simple – see, e.g., [IN].)
A variant of the above “proﬁnite” Grothendieck Conjecture is the following “pro-
p” Grothendieck Conjecture: Namely, instead of considering π
1(−)K, one considers the
functor that assigns to the K-variety XK the augmented group ΠXK → ΓK. The “pro- p”
Grothendieck Conjecture then asserts that, in certain situations, this functor should be
fully faithful. The present paper is concerned with proving various versions of the proﬁnite
and pro-p Grothendieck Conjectures under various conditions.
Statement of the Main Results:
Let p be a prime number. Let K be a sub-p-adic ﬁeld (cf. Deﬁnition 15.4 (i)), i.e., a
subﬁeld of a ﬁnitely generated ﬁeld extension of Q
p. In this paper, we prove a pro-p version
of the Grothendieck Conjecture (Theorem A) for dominant morphisms between “smooth
pro-varieties” and “hyperbolic pro-curves” over K. (Here, by a “smooth pro-variety”
(respectively, “hyperbolic pro-curve”) overK,w em e a naK-scheme which can be written
as a projective limit of smooth varieties (respectively, hyperbolic curves) over K in which
the transition morphisms are birational – cf. Deﬁnitions 15.4 (ii) and 16.4.) We then give
various versions of Theorem A (namely, Theorems A
′ and A′′) for truncated fundamental
groups. From TheoremA, we also derive a proﬁnite version of the Grothendieck Conjecture
(Theorem B) for morphisms between function ﬁelds (of arbitrary dimension) overK.N e x t ,
we apply Theorem A to prove the “injectivity part” (Theorem C) of the pro-p “Section
Conjecture.” Finally, in an Appendix, we derive from TheoremA an isomorphism version
of the Grothendieck Conjecture for certain hyperbolic surfaces (Theorem D).
Notation:I f K is a ﬁeld and XK is a K-scheme, we denote by Π prf
XK
def
= π1(XK)t h e
fundamental group of XK (for some choice of base-point), and by ΓK the absolute Galois
group of K. Then we have a natural morphism Πprf
XK
→ ΓK whose kernel is the geometric
fundamental group Δ prf
X ⊆ Πprf
XK
.L e t ΔX be the maximal pro- p quotient of Δ prf
X .T h e n
the kernel of Δprf
X → Δ X is a normal subgroup of Πprf
XK
, so by forming the quotient of Πprf
X
K
by this normal subgroup, we obtain a group ΠXK , together with a morphism ΠXK → ΓK
whose kernel is Δ X. Next, if Δ is a topological group, we let: Δ {0}
def
=Δ ;f o r i ≥ 1,
Δ {i}
def
=[ Δ {i − 1}, Δ {i − 1}] (here we mean “the closed subgroup generated by the purely
2

group-theoretic commutator subgroup”). In the speciﬁc case of fundamental groups, let
us write “Π i” (respectively, “Δi”) for Π/Δ {i} (respectively, Δ/Δ {i}).
Our ﬁrst main theorem is the following:
Theorem A. Let p be a prime number. Let K be sub-p-adic (cf. Deﬁnition 15.4
(i)). Let XK be a smooth pro-variety over K.L e t YK be a hyperbolic pro-curve over
K.L e t Homdom
K (XK,YK) be the set of dominant K-morphisms from XK to YK.L e t
Homopen
ΓK
(ΠXK ,ΠYK ) (respectively, Homopen
ΓK
(Πprf
X
K
,Πprf
YK
)), be the set of open, continuous
group homomorphisms ΠXK → ΠYK (respectively, Πprf
XK → Πprf
YK ) over ΓK, considered up
to composition with an inner automorphism arising from Δ Y (respectively, Δprf
Y ). Then
the natural maps
Homdom
K (XK,YK) → Homopen
ΓK
(Πprf
X
K
,Πprf
YK
)
→ Homopen
ΓK
(ΠXK ,ΠYK )
are bijective.
This Theorem is given as Theorem 16.5 (cf. also the Remark following Theorem 16.5) in
the text. It is from TheoremA that all of the other major results of this paper are derived.
We remark that:
(1) In fact, really, the main portion of Theorem A is the bijectivity of the
ﬁrst and third Hom’s. That is to say, the bijectivity of the ﬁrst and
second Hom’s follows formally from the bijectivity of the ﬁrst and third
Hom’s. See the Remark following Theorem 16.5 for more details.
(2) The notion of a “smooth pro-variety” (respectively, “hyperbolic pro-
curve”) has as special cases: (i) a smooth variety (respectively, hyper-
bolic curve) over K; (ii) the spectrum of a function ﬁeld of arbitrary
dimension (respectively, function ﬁeld of dimension one) over K.
(3) There exists a substantial body of people who, when they speak of
“the Grothendieck Conjecture” (respectively, “the pro- p Grothendieck
Conjecture”), refer to the following rather speciﬁc statement (which
is a special case of the general philosophy discussed in the preceding
subsection): If K is a ﬁnitely generated extension of Q,a n dX
K and
YK are either hyperbolic curves overK or the spectra of one-dimensional
function ﬁelds over K, then the isomorphisms of XK with YK are in
natural bijective correspondence with the outer isomorphisms overΓK of
Πprf
XK
(respectively,ΠXK )w i t hΠprf
YK
(respectively, ΠYK ). This statement
is manifestly a special case of the proﬁnite version – see (1) above –
(respectively, pro-p version, i.e., version as stated above) of TheoremA.
3

We also have truncated versions of Theorem A (Theorems 18.1 and 18.2 in the text):
Theorem A ′. Let K be sub-p-adic.L e tXK be a smooth variety over K.L e tYK be a
hyperbolic curve over K.L e tn ≥ 5. Then every continuous open homomorphism
θ:Π n
XK → Πn
YK
over ΓK induces a dominant morphism μ : XK → YK whose induced morphism on fun-
damental groups coincides (up to composition with an inner automorphism arising from
Δ
YK ) with the morphism Δ n−3
XK → Δ n−3
YK deﬁned by considering θ“modulo Δ {n − 3}.”
Theorem A ′′. Let K be sub-p-adic.L e tXK be a smooth pro-variety over K.L e tYK
be a hyperbolic pro-curve over K.L e t n′
0 be the minimum transcendence degree over Qp
of all ﬁnitely generated ﬁeld extensions of Qp that contain K.L e tn′′
0 be the transcendence
degree over K of the function ﬁeld of XK.L e tn0
def
= n′
0 +2 (n′′
0 − 1) + 1.
Let n ≥ 3n0 +5 . Then every continuous open homomorphism
θ:Π n
XK → Πn
YK
over ΓK induces a dominant morphism μ : XK → YK whose induced morphism on
fundamental groups coincides (up to composition with an inner automorphism arising
from Δ
YK ) with the morphism Δ n−3−3n0
XK
→ Δ n−3−3n0
YK
deﬁned by considering θ “mod-
ulo Δ {n − 3 − 3n0}.”
Our second main theorem (Theorem 17.1 in the text) is the following:
Theorem B. Let p be a prime number. Let K be sub-p-adic.L e t L and M be
function ﬁelds of arbitrary dimension over K. (In particular, we assume that K is alge-
braically closed in L and M.) Let HomK(Spec(L),Spec(M)) be the set of K-morphisms
from M to L.L e tHomopen
ΓK
(ΓL,ΓM ) be the set of open, continuous group homomorphisms
ΓL → ΓM over ΓK, considered up to composition with an inner automorphism arising
from Ker(ΓM → ΓK). Then the natural map
HomK(Spec(L),Spec(M)) → Homopen
ΓK
(ΓL,ΓM )
is bijective.
Note that in characteristic zero, this generalizes the results of [Pop1], [Pop2], where a
similar result to TheoremB is obtained, except that the morphisms ΓL → ΓM are required
to be isomorphisms,a n dK is required to be ﬁnitely generated over Q.
4

Our third main theorem (Theorem 19.1 in the text) is the following:
Theorem C. Let p be a prime number. Let K be sub-p-adic.L e tXK be a hyperbolic
curve over K.L e t XK(K) be the set of K-valued points of XK.L e t Sect(ΓK,ΠXK ) be
the set of sections ΓK → ΠXK of ΠXK → ΓK, considered up to composition with an inner
automorphism arising from Δ X. Then the natural map
XK(K) → Sect(ΓK,ΠXK )
is injective.
Finally, in the Appendix, we use Theorem A to derive the following result:
Theorem D. Let p be a prime number. Let K be sub-p-adic.L e t XK and YK be
hyperbolically ﬁbred surfaces (see Deﬁnition a2.1 in the Appendix for a precise deﬁnition
of this term) over K.L e tIsomK(XK,YK) be the set of K-isomorphisms (in the category
of K-schemes) between XK and YK.L e t IsomΓK (Πprf
XK
,Πprf
YK
) be the set of continuous
group isomorphisms Πprf
XK → Πprf
YK over ΓK, considered up to composition with an inner
automorphism arising from Δprf
Y . Then the natural map
IsomK(XK,YK) → IsomΓK (Πprf
XK ,Πprf
YK )
is bijective.
Recent W ork on the Grothendieck Conjecture:
In this subsection, we would like to take a brief look at recent work on the Grothendieck
Conjecture. We will concentrate only onmajor and recent(since the early 1980’s) develop-
ments that relate to the present paper, and we make no pretense of giving a complete history
of work on the Grothendieck Conjecture. Before beginning, it is worth pointing out that
until the appearance of the present paper (and its earlier version [Mzk2]), it was widely
assumed that the base ﬁeld “ K” that appears in the Grothendieck Conjecture should be
assumed to be ﬁnitely generated over Q. It is not clear precisely why this came to be as-
sumed by most people working in the ﬁeld, but one possible cause is thatthe Grothendieck
Conjecture appears to have originated as an alternative approach to diophantine geometry
([Groth], [Pop3]). Thus, if one’s ultimate aim is applications to diophantine geometry, it
is quite natural only to look at global ﬁelds (i.e., ﬁnitely generated extensions of Q), and
not at p-adic local ﬁelds, for instance.
Another reason for the ﬁxation on ﬁnitely generated extensions of Q appears to have
been that many people conceived of the Grothendieck Conjecture as an anabelian version
5

of the Tate Conjecture (Faltings’ theorem – see [Falt3]) for abelian varieties over number
ﬁelds. In fact, this point of view became so deeply engrained thatit gave rise to a tendency
for people to try to prove the Grothendieck Conjecture for hyperbolic curves over number
ﬁelds by deducing it from the Tate Conjecture for abelian varieties over number ﬁelds(see,
e.g., [Naka3]).
In fact, even important early work – such as [Naka1] on the Grothendieck Conjecture
for genus zero hyperbolic curves over number ﬁelds, or [Pop1], [Pop2] which treat the
birational case – which does not try to deduce the Grothendieck Conjecture from the
Tate Conjecture still had a distinctly global ﬂavor, and relied extensively on essentially
global techniques. These global techniques ultimately proved to be rather irrelevant to the
proof of the main results of the present paper. Nevertheless, what was important (from
the point of view of the author) about the work of H. Nakamura was that it established a
host of basic techniques for studying the outer Galois action on the (nonabelian) geometric
fundamental group of a hyperbolic curve, which was unknown territory to most arithmetic
geometers, who were only familiar with the Galois action on theabelian fundamental group
of an abelian variety. It was this culture of basic techniques (due to H. Nakamura) which
permitted the subsequent development of more powerful approaches to the Grothendieck
Conjecture itself, as discussed below.
The next important development (in early 1995) was the work of A. Tamagawa
([Tama]) in which it was shown that the isomorphism class of anyaﬃne hyperbolic curve
over an absolutely ﬁnitely generated ﬁeld is functorially determined by the outer Galois ac-
tion on its proﬁnite geometric fundamental group. (In fact, by a relatively straightforward
argument ([Mzk1]), it is possible to remove the “aﬃneness” hypothesis in Tamagawa’s
result, at least in characteristic zero.) Unlike the results of the present paper, Tamagawa’s
result holds in positive characteristic as well as in characteristic zero. Moreover, Tama-
gawa’s ideas on characterizing those sections ofπ
1(XK) → ΓK (where XK is a hyperbolic
curve over a ﬁeld K) that arise from geometric points ofXK played a pivotal role in inspir-
ing the author to prove the results of the present paper. Concretely speaking, the inﬂuence
of these ideas of Tamagawa can be seen in the argument of Section 9 of the present paper.
Finally, we turn to discussing the results of the present paper in a historical context.
As observed previously, the results of the present paper are (unlike Tamagawa’s results)
only valid in characteristic zero. On the other hand, the main advances of Theorem A of
the present paper relative to [Tama] are as follows:
(1) The hyperbolic curves involved are allowed to be proper.I n f a c t , w e
even allow what we call hyperbolic pro-curves.
(2) Instead of dealing with proﬁnite geometric fundamental groups, we
deal with pro-p geometric fundamental groups. Pro- p results tend to
be stronger than proﬁnite results in the sense that proﬁnite results usu-
ally follow immediately from pro- p results (see the Remark following
Theorem 16.5 for more details).
(3) Instead of just considering isomorphisms, we allow arbitrary dominant
morphisms between the varieties involved.
6

(4) The variety “on the left” (in the “Hom(−, −)” of TheoremA) is allowed
to be higher-dimensional, and need not even be hyperbolic.
(5) The base ﬁeld can be any subﬁeld of a ﬁnitely generated extension of
Qp, whereas for Tamagawa (in characteristic zero) the base ﬁeld must
be a ﬁnitely generated extension of Q.
From the point of view of the author, (5) is the most fundamental and important advance
as it is associated with the fact that the techniques of the present paper are fundamentally
diﬀerent from those of both Nakamura and Tamagawa in that they are couched in the
world of p-adic Hodge theory. That is to say, the proof of Theorem A may be regarded
as an application of the theory of [Falt1] and [BK]. It is precisely the use of these p-adic
techniques that allowed the author to prove a result which was much stronger (in the above
ﬁve senses) than the result of [Tama] (in characteristic zero) or [Mzk1]. Moreover, it is the
opinion of the author that:
The reason that it took so long for TheoremA to be discovered was the
overwhelming prejudice of most people in the ﬁeld that the Grothendieck
Conjecture for hyperbolic curves is an essentially global result, akin to
the Tate Conjecture for abelian varieties over number ﬁelds. In fact,
however, it is much more natural to regard the Grothendieck Conjecture
for hyperbolic curves as an essentially local, p-adic result that belongs
to that branch of arithmetic geometry known as p-adic Hodge theory.
Moreover, it is the feeling of the author that, more than the technical details of the state-
ment of Theorem A, it is this fact – i.e., that the Grothendieck Conjecture for hyperbolic
curves is best understood not as a global, number-theoretic result, but rather as a result in
p-adic Hodge theory – that is the central discovery of this paper.
The Structure of the Proof:
First, we remark that most of the paper (Sections 1 through 14) is devoted to proving
the following technical result:
(∗)
tech Suppose that K is a ﬁnite extension of Qp.L e t XK and YK
be proper hyperbolic curves over K.L e t UK be the spectrum of the
function ﬁeld of XK. Then every continuous surjective homomorphism
θ:Π UK → ΠYK over ΓK arises from some geometric morphism UK →
YK.
Section 15 is devoted to the rather standard technicalities necessary to generalize ( ∗)tech
to the case where K is any subﬁeld of a ﬁnitely generated extension of Qp. Section 16
is devoted to carrying out a standard “cutting by hyperplane sections argument” which
allows one to replaceU
K by a higher-dimensional smooth pro-variety (which thus completes
7

the proof of Theorem A). Section 17 is devoted to an induction argument used to derive
Theorem B from Theorem A. Section 18 discusses how the techniques used to prove
Theorem A in fact also give rise to the truncated versions Theorem A′ and Theorem
A′′. Finally, Section 19 reviews a standard argument (already present in the work of H.
Nakamura) which allows one to derive TheoremC from Theorem A. Thus, the rest of this
subsection will be devoted to outlining the proof of (∗)tech in Sections 1 through 14.
In order to simplify the discussion, let us consider ﬁrst the following slightly modiﬁed
version of (∗)tech:
(∗)prop Suppose that K is a ﬁnite extension of Qp.L e t XK and YK
be proper hyperbolic curves over K. Then every continuous surjective
homomorphism θ :Π XK → ΠYK over ΓK arises from some geometric
morphism XK → YK.
(Here, “ prop” stands for “proper” – i.e., since, unlike in ( ∗)tech,w h e r eUK appeared, in
(∗)prop only proper curves appear.) Thus, ( ∗)tech implies (∗)prop. In other words, (up to
some standard general nonsense) one may think of (∗)tech as the concatenation of (∗)prop
with the following assertion:
(∗)iner Any θ:Π UK → ΠYK as in (∗)tech necessarily factors through the
quotient ΠUK → ΠXK .
(Here, “ iner” stands for “inertia” – since the kernel of Π UK → ΠXK is generated by
inertia groups, so (∗)iner is the assertion that θ:Π UK → ΠYK always sends inertia groups
in ΠUK to the identity.) We will come back to the issue of (∗)iner later, but for now, let us
concentrate on outlining the proof of (∗)prop, since it is this which is the core of the paper.
Thus, let us assume that we have been given a continuous surjective homomorphism:
θ:Π XK → ΠYK
over ΓK. We would like to somehow manufacture out ofθa morphism from XK to YK.A
natural, naive way to start is the following: First, by replacingXK and YK by appropriate
´etale coverings, we may assume that neither is hyperelliptic (see, e.g., Lemma 10.4 (4)).
Let us write DX (respectively, DY )f o rH0(XK,ωXK /K) (respectively, H0(YK,ωYK /K)),
the space of global diﬀerentials onXK (respectively, YK). Then it is well-known that XK
(respectively, YK) embeds naturally in the projective space PX
def
= P(DX ) (respectively,
PY
def
= P(DY )). Moreover, since thep-adic ´etale cohomology ofX
K or Y
K can be computed
as the group cohomology of the respective pro- p geometric fundamental group, it follows
that the surjection θ induces a ΓK-equivariant injection
θH : H1(YK, Qp) ↪→ H1(XK , Qp)
8

Moreover, it is well-known (see, e.g., [Falt1], [Tate]) that the ΓK-module H1(XK, Qp)i s
Hodge-Tate, and, moreover, that if we tensorH1(XK, Qp)o v e rQp with Cp(1) (where the
“(1)” is a “Tate twist”), and take Γ K-invariants, we naturally recover the space DX of
diﬀerentials. Thus, since θH is ΓK-equivariant, if we tensor θH over Qp with Cp(1) and
take ΓK-invariants, we obtain from θ(in a natural way) a K-linear injection
θD : DY ↪→ DX
and hence a rational map from PX to PY .
Thus, in some sense, without doing anything terribly new (i.e., we have only just
applied results known to Tate since the 1960’s), we have already come relatively close to
constructing a morphism from X
K to YK. Indeed, what we have done is to construct a
morphism θD from diﬀerentials onYK to diﬀerentials onXK, which we would like to hope
arises as the pull-back map on diﬀerentials associated to a morphism from XK to YK.
Moreover, since XK (respectively, YK) is canonically embedded in PX (respectively, PY ),
it follows from elementary algebraic geometry that the “only” thing we need to show is
that θD preserves relations:T h a ti s ,i fi is a positive integer, let Di
X
def
= H0(XK,ω ⊗i
XK/K).
Similarly, we have Di
Y . Note that multiplication of diﬀerential forms deﬁnes a natural
morphism
i⨂
DY → Di
Y
Let us denote the kernel of this morphism byRi.T h u s ,Ri is the set ofrelations (of degree
i) deﬁning YK as a subvariety of PY . Moreover, by composing the ith tensor power of θD
with the natural morphism from theith tensor power ofDX to Di
X, we obtain a morphism
κi :
i⨂
DY → Di
X
Then we shall say that θ :Π XK → ΠYK preserves relations if κi(Ri) = 0 for all positive
integers i. As stated earlier, once we know that θ preserves relations, it follows from
elementary algebraic geometry (see [Harts], Chapter II) that the rational map fromPX to
PY deﬁned by θD induces a (dominant) morphism XK → YK, as desired. (Once one has
this morphism XK → YK, the fact that the map that it induces on fundamental groups
coincides with θ is a matter of general nonsense – for details, we refer to the argument
preceding Theorem 14.1.)
Thus, to review what we have done so far, we have reduced the main problem to
showing that anyθ:Π XK → ΠYK as in (∗)prop preserves relations. It should be emphasized
at this point, that so far everything that we have done has been painless general nonsense
– the substantive mathematical core of the argument is yet to come (after some more
general nonsense in the next few paragraphs). The next step is to introduce a ﬁeld L,
9

as follows: Let us assume for simplicity that XK extends to a stable curve X over OK.
Let p ∈X be an irreducible component of the special ﬁber of X. Then the completion
of the local ring OX,p is a p-adically complete discrete valuation ring OL, whose quotient
ﬁeld we denote by L.T h e s p a c e ΩL of p-adically continuous diﬀerentials of L over K is
then a one-dimensional L-vector space. Thus, L is, in some sense, one-dimensional over
K. Alternatively, one may think of Spec(L) roughly as some sort of small p-adic open set
in XK. At any rate, from the construction ofL, it follows that we have a naturalL-valued
point ξX : Spec(L) → XK.S i n c eL is “one-dimensional,” it is easy to check that the
restriction map on diﬀerentials
Di
X → Ω⊗i
L
(where “Ω ⊗i
L ” denotes the tensor product of i copies of Ω L over L)i s injective.T h u s ,
instead of checking that κi(Ri) = 0, it suﬃces to check that the composite
κi
L :
i⨂
DY → Ω⊗i
L
of κi with the above restriction map vanishes on Ri. In other words, we would like to
compute κi
L.
To “compute” κi
L, we need to go back to looking at fundamental groups. First of all,
let us observe that by functoriality of the fundamental group, the natural L-valued point
ξX : Spec(L) → XK deﬁnes a morphism
αL
X :Γ L → ΠXK
whose composite with the augmentation ΠXK → ΓK is the morphism ΓL → ΓK on Galois
groups induced by the inclusion of ﬁelds K ⊆ L. Moreover, if we compose αL
X with θ,w e
obtain a morphism
αL
Y :Γ L → ΠYK
Now let us suppose that we know that αL
Y is geometric, i.e., that it arises from some L-
valued point ξY : Spec(L) → YK of YK. Then it follows immediately from the theory of
[Falt1] that κi
L may be computed as the restriction map on diﬀerentials associated to ξY .
But it is clear that this restriction map on diﬀerentials annihilatesRi. Thus, to summarize:
in order to show that θ preserves relations, it suﬃces to show that αL
Y is geometric.
As remarked earlier, the above prefatory remarks are just “general nonsense.” The
mathematical core of the present paper lies in showing that given a geometricαL
X, together
with a θ:Π XK → ΠYK as in (∗)prop,t h er e s u l t i n gαL
Y is again geometric. The proof that
αL
Y is geometric is long and intricate, and can be divided roughly into four parts:
10

(1) First, we consider a K-valued point x ∈ XK(K)o f XK, and its asso-
ciated map on fundamental groups αK
X :Γ K → ΠXK . It is elementary
to show that the process of passing from the point x ∈ XK(K)t ot h e
arithmetic ﬁrst Chern class of its associated line bundle
ηK
X
def
= c1(OXK (x)) ∈ H2
et(XK, Zp(1)) = H2(ΠXK , Zp(1))
can be carried out just by working withαK
X (see the ﬁrst half of Section 7
for details on this “group-theoretic recipe” for concoctingηK
X out ofαK
X ).
On the other hand, by composingαK
X with θ,w eg e ta nαK
Y :Γ K → ΠYK .
The ﬁrst step then is to show that: If one carries out this recipe for
αK
Y (which may or may not arise geometrically) so as to obtain a class
ηK
Y ∈ H2(ΠYK , Zp(1)),t h e nηK
Y is the arithmetic ﬁrst Chern class of a
line bundle (necessarily of degree prime to p)o n YK. This is the topic
of Sections 1 through 5.
(2) Next, we go back to L-valued points, and their associated αL
X,αL
Y
.
Then, just as in the case of K-valued points, one can form ηL
Y ,a n d
one would like to know that ηL
Y is the arithmetic ﬁrst Chern class of
a line bundle (necessarily of degree prime to p)o n YL
def
= YK ⊗K L.
This is technically much more intricate than the K-valued case, and
is done (roughly speaking) by thinking about the “diﬀerence” between
the Chern class of a K-valued point and of an L-valued point, and
showing that this diﬀerence has special properties that are preserved by
θ. This allows one to derive the assertion in the L-valued case from
the corresponding assertion in the K-valued case, which was already
handled in (1) above. This reduction is the topic of Sections 6 and 7.
(3) Recall that we would like to show thatα
L
Y is geometric. We know from
(2) above that at least there exists a line bundle on YL of degree prime
to p. Then an elementary algebraic geometry argument shows that this
implies the existence of a rational point of YL deﬁned over a tamely
ramiﬁed (this will be crucial in Step (4)!) extension L′ of L. Although
this portion of the proof is technically rather trivial, its discovery was a
key step in the creation of the proof of Theorem A. This portion of the
proof is discussed in Section 8.
(4) Finally, by applying (3) to all the curves in a certain tower of coverings of
the original Y
L, we obtain a collection of rational points of the curves of
this tower that are deﬁned over tamely ramiﬁed extensions of L.T h e n
by using Faltings’ p-adic Hodge theory ([Falt1]), we show that these
rational points necessarily convergep-adically to a singleL-valued point
of YL = YK ⊗K L whose associated ΓL → ΠYK is necessarily equal to
11

αL
Y . This completes the proof of the geometricity of αL
Y . This portion
of the proof is given in Sections 9 and 10 (and applied in Section 13).
As discussed above, once one knows the geometricity of αL
Y , one can conclude the preser-
vation of relations– this is discussed in Sections 11 through 13. Finally, the proof of (∗)iner
(i.e., the diﬀerence between (∗)tech and (∗)prop) is given in Section 14. Unfortunately, in
order to show (∗)iner, it is necessary to go through all the steps discussed so far for a given
θ :Π UK → ΠYK , and then to conclude ( ∗)iner from the preservation of relations. This
makes the proof much more technically intricate than it would be if one could prove (∗)iner
from some sort of a priori argument, and then prove preservation of relations only for
θ:Π XK → ΠYK as in (∗)prop.
We would like to close this outline of the proof of Theorem A by discussing Step (1)
above (i.e., the content of Sections 1 through 5) in greater detail. The reason for this is
that Step (1) is what allowed us to generalize the “isomorphisms only” result of [Mzk2] to
the homomorphism result of the present paper. First of all, let us recall the notion of the
Malˇcev completion (cf., e.g., [Del], §9) of Δ
X. In fact, we shall only need the “smallest
nontrivial part of Malˇcev completion”: concretely, a unipotent algebraic group over Qp,
which we denote byMX, whose representations are the same as continuous representations
of ΔX/[Δ X,[Δ X,Δ X]] on some Qp-vector space V which is equipped with a ΔX-invariant
ﬁltration on whose subquotients ΔX acts trivially. In fact, since unipotent algebraic groups
are equivalent to their Lie algebras, we shall consider instead the Lie algebra MX of MX.
Next, observe that any sectionαK
X :Γ K → ΠXK deﬁnes (by conjugation) a true action
(i.e., not just an action up to inner automorphisms) of ΓK on ΔX, hence on MX. Relative
to this action, their exists a unique “weight zero quotient”MX ⊗Qp Cp → ZX. Here, we call
the quotient “weight zero” because it is the maximal quotientMX ⊗Qp Cp → Q for which
the action of ΓK on Q is such thatQ has a ﬁltration by ΓK-submodules whose subquotients
are ΓK-equivariantly isomorphic to Cp. Moreover, this quotient MX ⊗Qp Cp → ZX is
independent of the choice of section αK
X.
Step (1) is based on the following pair of observations:
(i) On the one hand, if αK
X arises geometrically, then ZX is “Hodge-
Tate.” (By abuse of terminology, we use the term “Hodge-Tate” here
to mean that ZX has a Cp-basis of ΓK-invariant elements.) This is the
content of Proposition 3.5.
(ii) On the other hand, if ZX is “Hodge-Tate,” then the class ηK
X is the
ﬁrst Chern class of a line bundle . This is essentially the content of the
calculation performed in Proposition 4.4 (see also Lemma 7.3).
Moreover, if one starts with a surjective θ :Π XK → ΠYK ,t h e nZX maps naturally to,
and in fact, surjects onto ZY . Thus, if one starts with an αK
X that arises geometrically,
then one knows from Observation (i) above that ZX is Hodge-Tate, but any quotient of a
Hodge-Tate representation of ΓK – i.e., such as ZY – is always Hodge-Tate, so Observation
(ii) above thus allows one to complete Step (1).
12

At this point, the reader may wonder how the author stumbled upon the two key
observations of the preceding paragraph. In fact, the author ﬁrst realized what was going
on by considering the ordinary case (see Section 1 for a detailed discussion). In this
case, the “weight zero quotient” exists at the level of groups, without passing to Malˇcev
completions or tensoring with Cp: namely, (in the notation of Section 1) it is the quotient
Δ X → Δet
X (which thus gives rise to a quotient Π XK → Πet
XK ). Moreover, as is shown in
Section 1, it is elementary to show that Δ X → Δet
X can be recovered group-theoretically,
and that every section ΓK → ΠXK that arises geometrically (from a point of XK) induces
a ﬁxed, group-theoretically constructible section θX :Γ K → Πet
XK of Πet
X
K → ΓK. These
observations are enough to complete Step (1) (in the ordinary case). Thus, one may
regard the discussion in the preceding paragraphs (which is valid in the nonordinary case)
as simply the result of generalizing the observations discussed in this paragraph in the
ordinary case to the possibly nonordinary case by means of the technical machinery of the
Malˇcev completion and p-adic Hodge theory.
Finally, let us make the following observation: As one can see from the key argument
discussed above, in fact, really, one does not need all of Δ
X. That is to say, in the
above argument (concerning the issue of when ZX is Hodge-Tate), one actually only uses
the quotient Δ X/[Δ X,[Δ X,Δ X]]. It is this observation that is behind the truncated
generalizations (Theorems A′ and A′′)o fT h e o r e mA.
Acknowledgements:
I would like to thank A. Tamagawa: (i) for inspiring me by means of his paper
[Tama]; (ii) for numerous discussions during which I presented the proof of the main
results of the present paper; (iii) for advice on surmounting two technical problems (see
the Remark at the end of Section 12; Lemmas 15.6 and 15.8); (iv) for explaining to me
the “general nonsense argument” preceding Theorem 14.1; (v) for explaining to me basic
facts concerning the Malˇcev completion, which were of immense importance in developing
the theory discussed in this paper. Also, I would like to thank T. Saito and G. Faltings
for pointing out various minor errors in earlier versions of this manuscript.
Section 0: Preliminaries and Notations
Let p be a prime number. Throughout this paper the symbol “∧” over or to the upper-
right of an object will denote thep-adic completion of that object.L e tK be a Q
p-algebra.
Let Ω be an algebraically closed ﬁeld. Then given a base-point b ∈ HomRing(K, Ω), we can
form the algebraic fundamental group
π1(Spec(K),b)
Typically, the choice of base-pointb will not be important for us, so we shall write ΓK for
π1(Spec(K),b). Suppose that Spec(
 K) is a “universal covering space” for Spec( K)s u c h
13

that b arises from a ring homomorphism
K → Ω. Then we may think of ΓK as Gal(
K/K).
We shall denote the ´etale cohomology of Spec(K)b y Hi(K, −). If M is a proﬁnite abelian
group with a continuous ΓK-action, then M naturally deﬁnes an inverse system {Fα } of
locally constant sheaves on the ´etale site of Spec(K), and we shall write
Hi(K,M )
for the inverse limit (over α)o ft h eHi(K, Fα). Note that for each r ∈ Z, Zp(r)( w h e r e
the “( r)” is a Tate twist) has a natural structure of ΓK-module.
Deﬁnition 0.1. We shall call K a p-adic ﬁeld if it is the quotient ﬁeld of a p-adically
complete, mixed characteristic discrete valuation ring OK. We shall denote the residue
ﬁeld (respectively, maximal ideal) of OK by k (respectively, mK). We shall call K a p-adic
local ﬁeld if k is a ﬁnite ﬁeld.
If K is ap-adic ﬁeld,a n d
K is an algebraic closure ofK,t h e nK↪ → Ω
def
=
 K determines
a base-point “ b,” and we have ΓK = Gal(
K/K). In this case, Hi(K, −) is equal to the
continuous group cohomology of the proﬁnite group Γ K.I f K is a p-adic local ﬁeld,t h e n
K is, in fact, a ﬁnite extension of Qp.
Now (without any assumptions on theQp-algebra K), let us assume that we are given
a hyperbolic curve XK → Spec(K) over K of type (g,r ). (By “curve,” we shall always
mean a smooth, one-dimensional, geometrically connected scheme over the base. By “type
(g,r ),” we mean that XK ⊗K
 K is obtained by removing r mutually nonintersecting
 K-
valued points from a proper curve over
 K of genus g. By “hyperbolic,” we mean that
2g − 2+ r ≥ 1.) When XK is proper, we shall denote its Jacobian (an abelian scheme over
K)b y JX (or JXK when several bases are in use and it is necessary to specify the base in
question).
Let us assume thatXK is equipped with a base-pointx ∈ XK(Ω) (which is compatible
with the base-point b of Spec(K)). Then we can form Π prf
X
def
= π1(XK,x)a n dΔ prf
X
def
=
π1(X
K,x). (The use of “Δ” to denote the geometric fundamental group may be new to
some readers. Here, we use “Δ” partly because “Π” is already used for the arithmetic
fundamental group and partly to conform to the notations of [Falt1], a reference on which
the present paper depends heavily.) Occasionally, to avoid confusion, we shall also use the
notation Δ
prf
XK for Δprf
X
.L e tΔ X be the maximal pro-p quotient of Δprf
X . Since the kernel
of Δ prf
X → Δ X is normal in Π prf
XK
, we may form the quotient of Π prf
X
K
by this kernel, and
call the resulting quotient group ΠXK . Thus, we have an exact sequence
1 → Δ X → ΠXK → ΓK → 1
Moreover, this exact sequence induces a representation
14

ρX :Γ K → Out(Δ X)
def
= Aut(Δ X)/Inn(Δ X)
into the outer automorphism group of Δ X. (Here, “Aut(Δ X)” (respectively, “Inn(ΔX)”)
denotes the group of continuous automorphisms (respectively, inner automorphisms) of
Δ X.) Conversely, it is well-known (see, e.g., [Tama],§7, A.) that the above exact sequence
can be recovered from ρX.
Next, we would like to introduce some terminology particular to pro-p groups. Let Δ
be apro-p group (i.e., a topological group obtained by taking an inverse limit of ﬁnite groups
of p-power order). Let Δ ′ ⊆ Δ be the unique normal subgroup of Δ with the following
property: Δ → Δ /Δ ′ is the maximal (topologically) Hausdorﬀ abelian quotient of Δ which
is annihilated by p.F o r i ≥ 0, let Δ <0> def
=Δ ;Δ <i+1> def
=( Δ <i>)′. Thus, we obtain a
descending series of closed normal (even characteristic!) subgroups... ⊆ Δ <i> ⊆ ... ⊆ Δ.
Note that since Δ, being a pro- p group, is “pro-solvable,” it follows that the intersection
of all the Δ <i> is {1}. Moreover, if Δ is topologically ﬁnitely generated, it follows that
the Δ /Δ <i> are all ﬁnite groups.
Deﬁnition 0.2. We shall refer to any one of the Δ<i> as a p-derivate of Δ.
Thus, in particular, if Δ = ΔX, then it follows (by the structure of the fundamental group
of an algebraic curve in characteristic zero) that Δ is topologically ﬁnitely generated, so
the Δ /Δ <i> are all ﬁnite groups.
Next, let us consider the Kummer sequence on XK, i.e., the exact sequence of ´etale
sheaves on XK given by 0 → Z/pnZ(1) → Gm → Gm → 0( f o rn ≥ 1). (Here, the
“(1)” is a “Tate twist,” and the morphism from Gm to Gm is given by raising to the
(pn)th power.) The connecting morphism induced on ´etale cohomology by the Kummer
sequence then gives us a morphism H1(XK, Gm) → H2(XK,(Z/pnZ)(1)). Now suppose
that L is a line bundle on XK. Applying the connecting morphism just considered to L
(which deﬁnes an element of H1(XK, Gm)), we obtain a compatible system of classes in
H2(XK,(Z/pnZ)(1)) (for each n ≥ 1), hence a class c1(L) ∈ H2(XK, Zp(1)).
Deﬁnition 0.3. We shall refer to c1(L)a st h earithmetic ﬁrst Chern class of L.
Finally, we have the following elementary technical result, which states that the ´etale
cohomology of a hyperbolic curve may be computed as the group cohomology of its fun-
damental group:
Lemma 0.4. Assume that K is a ﬁeld. For all integers i, r, the natural morphisms
Hi(Δ X, Zp(r)) → Hi(X
K, Zp(r)); Hi(Δ XK ×K XK , Zp(r)) → Hi(X
K ×
K X
K, Zp(r))
15

and
Hi(ΠXK , Zp(r)) → Hi(XK, Zp(r)); Hi(ΠXK ×KXK , Zp(r)) → Hi(XK ×K XK, Zp(r))
are isomorphisms.
Proof. By the Leray-Serre spectral sequence, it suﬃces to prove that the morphisms of
the ﬁrst line are isomorphisms. Let Z be X
K or X
K ×
K X
K. Then it follows by general
nonsense that it suﬃces to check that for any ﬁnite ´etale Galois coveringY → Z of p-power
order, and any cohomology class η ∈ Hi(Y, Fp)( w h e r ei> 0), there exists a ﬁnite ´etale
covering Y ′ → Y of p-power order such that η|Y ′ =0 . B yt h eK ¨unneth formula, it suﬃces
to do the case Z = X
K. Then what we must check is trivial for i> 2 (since then η=0t o
begin with), and clear for i = 1 (by the relationship between ´etale coverings and H1). If
i =2 ,t h e ni ts u ﬃ c e st ot a k eY ′ → Y such that Y ′ → Y has degree p over every connected
component of Y . This completes the proof. ⃝
Section 1: The Ordinary Case
Let p be a prime number. Let K be a p-adic ﬁeld with algebraically closed residue
ﬁeld . Then, as discussed in Section 0, the absolute Galois group of K will be denoted
ΓK.L e t XK → Spec(K)b ea hyperbolic curve over K of type ( g,r ). In this Section,
l e tu sa l s oa s s u m et h a tXK admits a stable extension X → Spec(OK) over OK.B yt h i s ,
we mean that there exists a (necessarily unique) r-pointed stable (in particular, proper)
curve
 X → Spec(OK)o fg e n u sg such that X is the complement in
 X of the images of the
r marking sections of
 X.L e t u s w r i t eXk (respectively,
 Xk)f o rX ⊗OK k (respectively,
X ⊗OK k).
Remark. Recall that anr-pointed stable curve of genusg (where 2g − 2+ r ≥ 1) is a proper,
ﬂat morphism f : C → S, together with r mutually disjoint sections σ1,...,σ r : S → C,
such that
(1) The geometric ﬁbers of f are connected, reduced, of arithmetic genus
g, and have at most nodes as singularities.
(2) The sheaf ωC/S(σ1 +... +σr) (i.e., the sheaf of sections of the dualizing
bundle of C over S with poles of order ≤ 1 at the divisors deﬁned by
the images of the sections σ1,...,σ r)i s relatively ample over S.
We refer to [DM], [Knud] for more details.
16

Now we make the following
Deﬁnition 1.1. We shall callXK ordinary if the Jacobian of every connected component
of the normalization of the curve
 Xk is an ordinary abelian variety.
In this Section, we would like to assume thatXK is ordinary. Under this assumption, it is
well-known that π1(
Xk)(p) (where the “(p)” denotes the maximal pro-p quotient) is a free
pro-p group of rankg. (Indeed, this follows from the fact thatH2
et(
Xk, Fp)=0( w h i c hm a y
be shown by using the long exact sequence in ´etale cohomology obtained by considering
Fp as the kernel of “1 − Frobenius” acting on O
Xk
), plus Proposition 2.3 of Chapter III,
§3, of [Sha].) Moreover, since ´etale coverings of
 Xk lift uniquely to characteristic zero, it
follows that we have a continuous surjection:
ϵX :Π XK → π1(
Xk)(p)
If we restrict ϵX to Δ X, we obtain a surjection Δ X → π1(
Xk)(p). In the following, we
shall regard π1(
Xk)(p) as a quotient of Δ X via this surjection. Let us denote this quotient
by Δet
X. Note that the kernel of the surjection ΔX → Δet
X is normal as a subgroup of ΠXK .
Thus, by taking the quotient of Π XK by this kernel, we obtain a quotient Π XK → Πet
XK .
In other words, we have an exact sequence
1 → Δet
X → Πet
XK → ΓK → 1
together with a surjection
ζX :Π et
XK → Δet
X
which is the identity on Δet
X.
Now observe that the kernel of ζX projects isomorphically to ΓK. Thus, we obtain a
section
θX :Γ K → Πet
XK
Next, let us observe that every element of Im( θX ) commutes with every element of Δ et
X.
Indeed, this follows from the fact that such commutation relations hold after projection
by Π
et
XK → ΓK, plus the fact that Im( θX )=K e r (ζX)i sn o r m a li nΠet
XK (and maps
isomorphically to Γ K via the projection Π et
XK → ΓK). On the other hand, since, as
is well-known (see, e.g., [Tama], §1, Propositions 1.1, 1.11), pro- p free groups (of rank
≥ 2) have trivial centers, it thus follows that we obtain the following “group-theoretic”
characterization of θX (when g ≥ 2):
17

Lemma 1.2. Suppose that g ≥ 2. Then the section θX :Γ K → Πet
XK of Πet
XK → ΓK is
the unique section whose image commutes with every element of Δet
X ⊆ Πet
XK .
On the other hand, the quotient Δ X → Δet
X (and hence also the quotient Π XK →
Πet
XK ) can also be reconstructed group-theoretically by means of the following condition
on an open normal subgroup H ⊆ Δ X:
(∗)et Let N ⊆ Δ X be any subgroup such thatH ⊆ N and N/H is cyclic.
Then there exists a surjection Nab def
= N/[N,N ] → Q,w h e r eQ is a free
Zp-module of rank one, with the following properties: (i) there exists
an open subgroup Γ ′ ⊆ ΓK that stabilizes N and Nab → Q and acts
trivially on Q; (ii) the surjection N → N/H factors through Q.
Then we have the following “group-theoretic” characterization of the quotient ΔX → Δet
X:
Lemma 1.3. The kernel of Δ X → Δet
X is the intersection of all open normal subgroups
H ⊆ Δ X such that H satisﬁes the condition (∗)et.
Proof. The proof is entirely the same as that of Sections 3 and 8 of [Mzk1]. The basic
idea is that if the covering corresponding to Δ X/H is not ´etale (over OK), then it has
nontrivial inertia subgroups. Such inertia subgroups have nontrivial cyclic subgroups. If
we then apply ( ∗)et to the case where N/H is one of these nontrivial cyclic subgroups,
then we have a contradiction, since the quotient N → N/H factors through the quotient
N → Q; moreover, the quotient N → Q necessarily corresponds to a covering which is
´etale over OK because of the assumption concerning the action of Γ′ ⊆ ΓK on Q. ⃝
Let us review what we have done so far. So far, we have:
(1) constructed quotients ΠXK → Πet
XK and ΔX → Δet
X, as well as a section
ΓK → Πet
XK via various geometric considerations concerning XK;
(2) shown (when g ≥ 2) that the above quotients and section may be
reconstructed entirely “group-theoretically.”
Here, we pause to make the following
Remark Concerning the Term “Group-Theoretic.” In [Mzk1] and [Mzk2], we imparted
mathematical rigor to the term “group-theoretic” (cf. the remark on this issue in Section
14 of [Mzk2]) by specifying that it meant “preserved by isomorphism.” In the present
paper, however, we would like to consider homomorphisms which are not necessarily iso-
morphisms. Thus, in the present paper, when we wish to state that a certain property or
object is preserved by such homomorphisms, we shall state this explicitly without using
18

the term “group-theoretic.” In the above discussion, however, we recommend the reader to
simply accept this term at the level of “common sense,” since we will not use the “group-
theoreticity” stated in any of the results of this Section in the proof of any of the main
theorems of this paper.
Finally, before continuing, we make the following important observation: Let αx :
ΓK → ΠXK denote the section of Π XK → ΓK determined (up to composition with an
inner automorphism induced by an element of Δ X)b yap o i n tx ∈ XK(K). Denote by
αet
x :Γ K → Πet
XK the composite of αx with ΠXK → Πet
XK .
Lemma 1.4. We have αet
x = θX.
Proof. It suﬃces to show that the composite of αet
x with the surjection ζX :Π et
XK →
Δet
X is trivial. Interpreted geometrically, this simply means that “the pull-back of any
´etale covering Y → X (i.e., ´etale over OK) to Spec(K) via x is the trivial ´etale covering
of Spec(K).” But this assertion follows immediately from the fact that OK is strictly
henselian. ⃝
Section 2: Review of Galois Cohomology
Let K be a p-adic ﬁeld whose residue ﬁeld is perfect .L e t S → Spec(OK)b ea
geometrically connected smooth morphism, and let D ⊆ S be a relative (over OK) divisor
with normal crossings. Let us write Slog for the log scheme obtained by equipping S with
the log structure deﬁned byD (as in [Kato]). Let us also assume thatS is small (in the sense
of [Falt1], [Falt2]): Recall that this simply means that S is aﬃne, say, equal to Spec( R),
and, moreover, ´etale over some OK[X1,...,X d] in such a way that D is schematically the
inverse image of the zero locus of the functionX1 ·... ·Xd. The reason we wish to deal with
small (S, D) is that in [Falt1], certain Galois cohomology groups associated to such (S, D)
are computed explicitly by means of the theory of almost ´etale extensions. The purpose
of this Section is to review certain consequences of the theory of [Falt1] and [Falt2] that
are of relevance to us in this paper.
Let R
K
def
= R ⊗OK K.L e tRK →
 RK be the maximal extension of RK which is ´etale
outside of DK.L e t
 R be the normalization of R in
 RK.L e t ˆ
R (respectively, ˆR)b et h e
p-adic completion of
 R (respectively, R); let ˆ
RK
def
= ˆ
R ⊗OK K, ˆRK
def
= ˆR ⊗OK K.L e t ˆRO
K
be the p-adic completion of R ⊗OK O
K; ˆR
K
def
=( ˆRO
K
) ⊗OK K.L e tΓR
def
= Gal(
RK/RK).
Thus, we have a natural surjection ΓR → ΓK whose kernel we denote by Δprf
R .T h i sg i v e s
us a natural exact sequence:
1 → Δprf
R → ΓR → ΓK → 1
19

Now we would like to compute some Galois cohomology groups:
Lemma 2.1. For all j ∈ Z, we have:
(1) H0(Δprf
R , ˆ
RK(j)) = ˆR
K(j);
(2) H1(Δprf
R , ˆ
RK(j)) = ΩSlog/OK ⊗R ˆR
K(j − 1).
(Here the “(j)” is a Tate twist.)
Proof. This follows from Theorem 4.4 of Section I of [Falt1]. Indeed, (1) follows from
[Falt1], Section I, Theorem 4.4, (i) (applied to the case i = 0, and tensored with K(j)),
while (2) follows from [Falt1], Section I, Theorem 4.4, (iv) (tensored with K(j)). ⃝
Lemma 2.2. We have: (i) H0(ΓK, ˆR
K)= ˆRK; (ii) Hn(ΓK, ˆR
K(j)) = 0 (for j ̸=0 ;
n =0 ,1); (iii) H1(ΓK, ˆR
K)= ˆRK.
Proof. This result is due to [Tate] in the caseR = OK. (Indeed, in this case, (i) and (iii)
follow from [Tate], §3.3, Theorem 1; while (ii) – at least in the case j = 1 (the proof for
arbitrary j ̸= 0 is entirely similar) – follows from [Tate], §3.3, Theorem 2.) The slightly
more general result stated here (i.e., for R not necessarily equal to OK) follows by the
same argument as that employed by Tate in the case R = OK (the point being that in
general, R is OK-ﬂat). Alternatively, the cohomology groups in the Lemma can also be
computed using almost ´etale extensions as in [Falt1]. ⃝
Lemma 2.3. For n =0 ,1, we have: (i) Hn(ΓR, ˆ
RK)= ˆRK; (ii) Hn(ΓR, ˆ
RK(−1)) = 0.
Proof. This follows from the Leray-Serre spectral sequence (applied to the exact sequence
of groups that appears directly before Lemma 2.1), plus the preceding two Lemmas. ⃝
Now let us assume that we are given an r-pointed stable log-curve flog : Xlog → Slog
of genus g,w h e r e2g − 2+ r ≥ 1. (By this we mean that Xlog is obtained by pulling
back the universal log-curve Clog →
 M
log
g,r via some log morphism Slog →
 M
log
g,r.T h e l o g
structure of the universal log curve is deﬁned by the divisor with normal crossings which
is the union of the marked points and the singular ﬁbers. See, e.g., [Mzk3], Section 3, for
more details; cf. also the Remark preceding Deﬁnition 1.1 of this paper for a review of
the notion of a “pointed stable curve.”) Let U
def
= S − D. Then taking the relative ﬁrst
cohomology module of f|UK in the ´etale topology with coeﬃcients in Zp gives rise to a
local system over UK, hence a ΓR-module H∨.A sa Zp-module, H∨ is free of rank = 2g
20

(if r =0 )a n d=2 g + r − 1( i fr> 0). Let H be the ΓR-module given by HomZp(H∨, Zp).
Now let
H0
def
=( R1f∗OX)∨
(a vector bundle over S, or alternatively, a projective R-module, of rank g)a n d
H1
def
=( f∗ωXlog/Slog )∨
(a vector bundle overS, or alternatively, a projectiveR-module, whose rank is =g if r =0
and = g + r − 1i f r> 0).
Proposition 2.4. There is a natural exact sequence
0 →H 1 ⊗R
ˆ
RK(1) → H ⊗Zp
ˆ
RK →H 0 ⊗R
ˆ
RK → 0
which is compatible with the natural action of ΓR on all three terms.
Proof. This is an immediate consequence of the “Comparison Theorem” (Theorem 6.2 of
[Falt2]). The validity of the proof of this Theorem given in [Falt2] has been disputed by
various mathematicians. However, since Proposition 2.4 is a relatively weak consequence
of the “Comparison Theorem,” it already follows from the portion of [Falt2] that is not in
dispute. (That is to say, we need only thatM is “Hodge-Tate,” not that it is “crystalline.”)
Alternatively, although the sort of parametrized (i.e., over a base S) Hodge-Tate decom-
position that we need here is not stated in [Falt1], it follows immediately from the theory
of [Falt1] by exactly the same proof as that of the main result of [Falt1]. Yet another proof
of this sort of result is given in [Hyodo] (the ﬁnal Theorem – i.e., the “relative version”
– in [Hyodo], §0.3), although here we need the (relatively straightforward) logarithmic
generalization of [Hyodo]’s result. ⃝
Section 3: The W eight Zero Quotient
In this Section, we maintain the notation of the preceding Section. The purpose of
this Section is to give a (rather weak) nonabelian analogue of Proposition 2.4. In fact,
a much stronger “nonabelian comparison theorem” for the fundamental group of a curve
can be proven, but since I do not know of any place where such a result has been written
up, and, moreover, in this paper, only a relatively weak nonabelian comparison theorem is
needed, I decided instead to give a rather short ad hoc treatment of this issue which will,
nonetheless, be suﬃcient for the purposes of this paper.
21

Let us denote the fundamental group of Xlog
K by Πprf
X
K . Thus, we have a natural
surjection Πprf
XK → ΓR. As usual, we denote the kernel of this surjection by Δ prf
X ⊆ Πprf
XK ,
and the maximal pro- p quotient of Δ prf
X by Δ X. Moreover, by forming the quotient of
Πprf
XK
by the kernel of Δprf
X
→ Δ X,w eo b t a i nΠXK . Thus, just as in Section 1, we have an
exact sequence
1 → Δ X → ΠXK → ΓR → 1
Moreover, any section σ : S → X of X → S whose image avoids the marked points and
nodes deﬁnes a section πσ :Γ R → ΠXK of the above exact sequence. Such a section πσ
then deﬁnes an action of Γ R on Δ X by conjugation. Note that until one speciﬁes the
section ασ :Γ R → ΠXK , one only has an outer action of ΓR on ΔX (i.e., an action deﬁned
only up to inner automorphisms); that is to say, in general, there is no natural action (in
the usual, non-outer sense) of ΓR on Δ X until one speciﬁes a section of ΠXK → ΓR.
The next step is to introduce theMalˇcev completion ofΔ X. We refer to [Del], [NT] for
more details. In fact, for our purposes, it will be suﬃcient to consider a truncated form of
the Malˇcev completion of Δ
X. This truncated form may be deﬁned as follows: LetC be the
category of ﬁnite dimensional Qp-vector spaces V equipped with a continuous ΔX-action
that factors through Δ X/[Δ X,[Δ X,Δ X]] and which admits a Δ X-invariant ﬁltration on
whose subquotients Δ X acts trivially. (The morphisms of this category are the Qp[Δ X]-
linear morphisms V → V ′.) Then C is a Tannakian category over Qp, hence gives rise to
an algebraic group MX over Qp. Moreover, this algebraic group MX is unipotent, hence
corresponds to a nilpotent Lie algebra MX. For any Qp-algebra A, we shall write (MX)A
(respectively, (MX)A)f o rMX ⊗Qp A (respectively, MX ⊗Qp A).
Let us write MX[1] for the commutator [MX, MX] of this Lie algebra, and MX[0] for
the quotient MX/MX[1]. Then MX[0] may be identiﬁed with HQp
def
= H ⊗Zp Qp (where H
is as in the discussion following Lemma 2.3 in Section 2). Thus, we get an exact sequence
0 → MX[1] → MX → MX[0] = HQp → 0
Moreover, the commutator [−, −] deﬁnes a surjection
cX : ∧2 HQp → MX[1]
Now observe that although there is no natural action of ΓR on MX (unless one chooses a
section of ΠXK → ΓR), there is nonetheless a natural action of ΓR on MX[0] and MX[1]
with respect to which cX is equivariant. Now we have the following classical result
Lemma 3.1. The kernel of cX is zero if r> 0.I f r =0 , then the kernel of cX is one-
dimensional, and equal to the image of the dual to the intersection form∧2 H∨
Qp → Qp(−1)
(deﬁned by the cup product pairing on the cohomology of Δ X).
22

Proof. If r> 0, then Δ X is a free pro-p group. Thus, in this case the result follows by
consideration of the fact that a representation on a vector space V of the free group on n
generators is the same as giving n endomorphisms of V .I f r =0 ,t h e nΔX is the quotient
of a free pro-p group by a single relation; it is this relation which generates the kernel of
cX. Moreover, it is easy to see from the well-known explicit form of this relation that its
image in ∧2 HQp is precisely as speciﬁed in the statement of the Lemma (cf. the discussion
in §2 of [NT]). ⃝
Next, we would like to construct a certain special quotient ZX of (MX)ˆ
RK
.B y t h e
well-known categorical equivalence between unipotent algebraic groups and nilpotent Lie
algebras (cf. [Del], §9), this quotient will deﬁne a quotient ZX of (MX)ˆ
RK
. The construc-
tion of ZX from (MX)ˆ
RK
consists of two steps. The ﬁrst step is as follows: Consider the
surjection
∧2 H ⊗Zp
ˆ
RK →∧ 2 H0 ⊗R
ˆ
RK
deﬁned by projecting by means of the surjection in the short exact sequence of Proposition
2.4. It follows from Lemmas 2.3 (ii) (in the casen = 0) and 3.1 that this surjection factors
through (MX[1])ˆ
RK
. Thus, we obtain a surjection
(MX[1])ˆ
RK
→∧ 2 H0 ⊗R
ˆ
RK
By pushing forward the exact sequence 0 → MX[1] → MX → MX[0] → 0 (tensored over
Qp with ˆ
RK) via this surjection, we thus obtain a Lie algebra UX (over ˆ
RK). Thus, we
have a surjection of Lie algebras (MX)ˆ
RK
→ UX, together with an exact sequence
0 → UX[1] → UX → UX[0] → 0
where UX[1]
def
=[ UX, UX]= ∧2 H0 ⊗R
ˆ
RK,a n dUX[0] = (MX[0])ˆ
RK
.
Now we come to the second step in the construction of ZX. First let us denote by
UX[0] → UX[0, 0]
def
= H0 ⊗R
ˆ
RK the surjection deﬁned by the surjection in the short exact
sequence of Proposition 2.4. Let UX[0, 1] ⊆ UX[0] be the kernel of this surjection. Let
BX ⊆ UX denote the inverse image of UX[0, 1] ⊆ UX[0] under the surjection UX → UX[0].
Then it follows from the deﬁnition of UX that BX is an abelian Lie algebra which, in fact,
lies in the center of the Lie algebra ofUX. (Indeed, this will follow as soon as we show the
vanishing of [BX, UX], which is equal to the image ofUX[0, 1] ∧UX[0] ⊆∧ 2 HQp under the
composite of cX : ∧2 HQp → MX[1] with the projection MX[1] → UX[1] = ∧2 H0 ⊗R
ˆ
RK;
but this image is zero, by the deﬁnition ofUX[0, 1].) This observation implies, in particular,
that although, a priori,w eh a v eo n l ya nouter action of ΓR on UX, hence on BX,i nf a c t ,
we get a natural (non-outer) action of ΓR on BX. (That is, the point is that the various
23

actions of Γ R on BX arising from diﬀerent sections of Π XK → ΓR diﬀer only by an
automorphism on BX induced by conjugation by some element of ΔX; but since BX lies
in the center of UX, it follows that such an automorphism of BX is always equal to the
identity.)
Next, let us note that we have exact sequences
0 → BX → UX → UX[0, 0] → 0
and
0 → UX[1] → BX → UX[0, 1] → 0
where the latter exact sequence is an exact sequence of ΓR-modules (a statement which has
meaning as a result of the observation at the end of the preceding paragraph). Now observe
that Lemma 2.3 (ii) (for n =0 ,1 – note that here we use that UX[1] = ∧2 H0 ⊗R
ˆ
RK
is “of weight zero,” while UX[0, 1] = H1 ⊗R
ˆ
RK(1) is “of weight one”) implies that the
latter exact sequence admits a unique ΓR-equivariant splitting: BX → UX[1]. Moreover,
since BX is (as observed above) contained in the center of the Lie algebra UX, it follows
that the kernel of this splitting BX → UX[1] forms a Lie ideal in UX. Thus, if we then
push forward the former exact sequence via this surjection BX → UX[1], we obtain a Lie
algebra ZX. As usual, this Lie algebra ﬁts into an exact sequence
0 → ZX[1] → ZX → ZX[0] → 0
Moreover, one has natural identiﬁcations: ZX[1] = ∧2 ZX[0] (via the commutator map);
and ZX[0] = H0 ⊗R
ˆ
RK (induced by the surjection of the short exact sequence of Propo-
sition 2.4). In particular, ZX[0] is of rank g over ˆ
RK. Finally, as noted above, ZX deﬁnes
a unipotent algebraic group ZX.
Deﬁnition 3.2. We shall refer to ZX as the weight zero quotient of Δ X (even though
it is not literally a quotient). (Here, the “ Z”o f ZX stands for the “zero” of “weight zero
quotient.”)
Now let us ﬁx a (continuous) section
α :Γ R → ΠXK
Then α induces an action of ΓR on Δ X.S i n c eZX was formed naturally – and, for that
matter, group-theoretically –f r o mΔX,w et h u so b t a i na na c t i o no fΓR on ZX which, in
24

general, will depend on the choice ofα. The next issue we would like to consider isto what
extent the sequence of ΓR-modules
0 → ZX[1] → ZX → ZX[0] → 0
admits a ΓR-equivariant section. At any rate, this exact sequence deﬁnes an extension
class
ηα ∈ H1(ΓR,(ZX[0])∨ ⊗ ˆ
RK
ZX[1])
By Lemma 2.3 (i) (for n = 1 – here we use that both ZX[0] = H0 ⊗R
ˆ
RK and ZX[1] =
∧2 ZX[0] are “of weight zero”), it follows that this Galois cohomology group may be
identiﬁed naturally with
(H∨
0 ⊗R ∧2 H0) ⊗R ˆRK
That is to say, one may think of ηα as a section of a certain vector bundle over ˆRK.
Proposition 3.3. Suppose that α arises as theασ associated to some sectionσ : S → X
(whose image avoids the marked points and nodes – cf. the discussion at the beginning of
this Section). Then η
α =0 .
Proof. Since everything is functorial, one reduces immediately to the universal case, as
follows: In the present context, the essential data that we begin with is ar-pointed stable
curve of genus g (i.e., flog : Xlog → Slog), plus a section (i.e., σ). The moduli stack for
this data is (a certain dense open substack of) the tautological curve C→
 Mg,r over the
moduli stack
 Mg,r of r-pointed stable curves of genus g over Zp. Thus, by “restriction,”
it suﬃces to prove the Proposition in the case where S is ´etale over the algebraic stack
C. Also, since everything involved commutes with base-extension, it is easy to see that we
may assume that k is algebraically closed. Then over some dense open T ⊆ (S − D) ⊗OK k,
the Jacobian of X ⊗OK k will be ordinary. Thus, every point of β ∈ S(OK) that maps
Spec(k) ⊆ Spec(OK)i n t oT deﬁnes an ordinary (in the sense of Deﬁnition 1.1) hyperbolic
curve Yβ → Spec(K)o v e rK (by restricting (the complement of the marking sections in)
X → S to β).
Next, observe that that if we restrict the section σ to the point β, we get a section
σβ : Spec(K) → Yβ which induces an action of ΓK on Δet
Yβ (i.e., the quotient ΔYβ → Δet
Yβ
considered in Section 1). By Lemmas 1.2 and 1.4, this action is, in fact, thetrivial action.
Now I claim that in the case of such an ordinary curve:
The quotient Δ Yβ → Δet
Yβ (considered in Section 1) induces a natural
(in particular, ΓK-equivariant) isomorphism of the weight zero quotient
25

ZYβ of Δ Yβ (= Δ X)w i t ht h eM a l ˇcev completion of Δ et
Yβ (truncated at
the second step and tensored over Zp with ˆ
K).
Indeed, it follows immediately from the construction ofZYβ that the surjection ΔYβ → Δet
Yβ
induces a morphism from ZYβ to the “weight zero quotient” (i.e., constructed in a fashion
analogous to the construction of ZYβ )o fΔ et
Yβ . On the other hand, since the action of
ΓK on Δet
Yβ is trivial, it follows that the “weight zero quotient” of Δet
Yβ is just the Malˇcev
completion of Δet
Yβ (truncated at the second step and tensored overZp with ˆ
K). Moreover,
it is clear that the map induced on abelianizations by this morphism from ZYβ to this
weight zero quotient of Δet
Yβ is an isomorphism. (Indeed, surjectivity follows from the fact
that we are dealing (by deﬁnition) with various quotients of a single object; injectivity
then follows from Proposition 2.4 and Lemma 2.3 (ii) (for n = 0), and the fact that both
abelianizations are of rank g over ˆ
K.) Thus, (since Δ et
Yβ is a free pro- p group of rank g
– cf. the discussion following Deﬁnition 1.1) we conclude that we get an isomorphism as
stated in the “claim.” This completes the veriﬁcation of the claim.
Thus, any minimal choice of generators of Δet
Yβ (which will necessarily be ﬁxed by ΓK)
deﬁnes a splitting of the sequence of Γ K-modules
0 → ZX[1] → ZX → ZX[0] → 0
Here the ΓK-action is given by composing the ΓR-action considered above with the mor-
phism – well-deﬁned up to composition with an inner automorphism (which does not
bother us since this inner automorphism corresponds to a coboundary in the computation
of the cohomology class ηα that we are interested in) – ΓK → ΓR deﬁned by β. But from
the deﬁnition of the extension class ηα, this means that the restriction
ηα |β ∈ (H∨
0 ⊗R ∧2 H0) ⊗R,β K
of ηα to the point β is zero. On the other hand, if ηα is zero when restricted to any such
β (i.e., any β ∈ S(OK) that maps Spec(k) ⊆ Spec(OK)i n t oT), it is clear that ηα itself
must be zero. This completes the proof of the Proposition. ⃝
Note that so far, in this Section and the last, we have been dealing with families
of curves, parametrized over a base S. Before continuing on to the next Section, it is
worthwhile to go back to the case of “a single curve” overK in order to make explicit the
consequences for such single curves of the theory developed thus far.
Thus, let XK → Spec(K)b ea hyperbolic curve. As in Section 1, we have an exact
sequence
1 → Δ X → ΠXK → ΓK → 1
26

Then let us ﬁrst note that the theory reviewed in Section 2 can be applied in the present
nonparametrized situation as well to produce (following precisely the same recipe as in the
parametrized situation considered as above) a Lie algebra ZX, together with a group ZX
(both over ˆ
K).
Deﬁnition 3.4. We shall refer to ZX as the weight zero quotient of Δ X.
Let x ∈ XK(K). Then x deﬁnes a section αx :Γ K → ΠXK (well-deﬁned up to composition
with an inner automorphism arising from Δ X). Moreover, αx deﬁnes an action of Γ K on
ZX.
Proposition 3.5. Relative to the action ofΓK on ZX deﬁned by αx, the exact sequence
of ΓK-modules
0 → ZX[1] → ZX → ZX[0] → 0
splits.
Proof. Note that this Proposition is not, strictly speaking, a special case of Proposition
3.3 (i.e., where we take S = OK), since Proposition 3.3 only addresses the case where
the divisor of bad reduction is ﬂat over OK. However, by means of specialization, one
can reduce the present Proposition to the “universal case” considered during the proof of
Proposition 3.3. Moreover, in this case, Proposition 3.3 already tells us that the relevant
exact sequence is split. This completes the proof. ⃝
Remark. Let us write (Δ
X)Qp for the full (i.e., not truncated as above) Malˇcev completion
(cf. [Del], [NT]) of Δ X. Then in some sense, Proposition 3.5 above is a truncated version
of a theorem that states “relative to the action ofΓK on (Δ X)Qp deﬁned by αx, (Δ X)Qp is
Hodge-Tate.” Here, since (ΔX)Qp is an inverse limit of unipotent algebraic groups, one can
interpret “Hodge-Tate” to mean that the Lie algebras of each of these unipotent algebraic
groups are Hodge-Tate representations. In fact, it is not diﬃcult to prove that (Δ X)Qp
is Hodge-Tate (even for arbitrary higher-dimensional smooth XK → Spec(K)) as follows:
One reduces the higher-dimensional case to the curve case by cutting with hyperplane
sections. Then for curves, by considering the universal case, one can reduce to the case of
curves smooth over O
K. Finally, for curves smooth overOK, one can apply the techniques
of [Falt1] (by considering cohomology spaces with coeﬃcients valued in unipotent algebraic
groups over Q
p). This shows that (ΔX)Qp is Hodge-Tate. Moreover, one can also construct
a nontruncated “weight zero quotient (Δ X)Qp → Z∞
X ” (that is to say, ifXK is a curve of
genus g,t h e nZ∞
X will be (ΓK-equivariantly) isomorphic to the Malˇcev completion over ˆ
K
of the free group on g generators). In fact, it is even possible to show that (Δ X)Qp is de
Rham, but we shall not pursue such issues here since they are not relevant to the proof of
27

the main results of this paper. Nevertheless, we remark that this sort of theorem has been
veriﬁed by A. Shiho ([Shiho]), in a manuscript in preparation.
Section 4: J-Geometric Sections
We maintain the notations of the latter portion of Section 3. Moreover, we assume
that our curve XK → Spec(K)i s proper (hence of genus ≥ 2) and that XK(K) ̸= ∅.I n
this Section, we would like to consider a continuous homomorphism
α :Γ K → ΠXK
which deﬁnes a section of the surjection Π XK → ΓK. The section α deﬁnes an action of
ΓK on ΔX by conjugation, and hence also an action of ΓK on ZX. In particular, we would
like to consider the signiﬁcance of the following condition on α:
(∗)spl The exact sequence of ΓK-modules (relative to the action deﬁned
by α)
0 → ZX[1] → ZX → ZX[0] → 0
splits.
The main result of this Section is to show that the group-theoretic condition (∗)spl is
equivalent to the statement that α is “ J-geometric”(a term which means that α acts in
some respects as if it came from a geometric point x ∈ XK(K) – see Deﬁnition 4.3 for a
precise deﬁnition).
To do this, ﬁrst we need to recall certain facts concerning Jacobians and their funda-
mental groups. For d ∈ Z,l e tJ(d)
X → Spec(K) be the Picard scheme of line bundles onXK
of degree d.T h u s ,J(d)
X is a torsor over JX = J(0)
X , the Jacobian of XK. Note that J(d)
X is
deﬁned even if XK does not admit any K-rational points, as the scheme representing the
´etale sheaﬁﬁcation of the usual Picard functor of degree d line bundles. Note that a base-
point x ∈ XK(Ω) (where Ω is the algebraically closed ﬁeld of Section 0) may be regarded
as a degree one divisor on XΩ = XK ⊗K Ω, hence (by multiplying this divisor by d)w e
obtain a point xd ∈ J(d)
X (Ω). This allows us to deﬁne the arithmetic fundamental group
π1(J(d)
X ,xd), as well as its geometric counterpart π1(J(d)
X
K
,xd). If we form the quotient
of π1(J(d)
X ,xd)b yt h ek e r n e lo fπ1(J(d)
X
K
,xd) → Δ J(d)
X
(i.e., the projection to the maximal
pro-p quotient of the geometric fundamental group), then we obtain a topological group
ΠJ(d)
X
. Moreover, we have a natural exact sequence
28

1 → Δ J(d)
X
→ ΠJ(d)
X
→ ΓK → 1
Finally, the natural embedding XK ↪→ J(1)
X induces a natural surjection Π XK → ΠJ(1)
X
,
whose kernel is the commutator subgroup of ΔX.
Now let us observe that we can reconstruct ΠJ(d)
X
from ΠXK → ΓK, as follows. First of
all, we can reconstruct ΠJ(1)
X
as the quotient of ΠXK by the commutator subgroup of ΔX.
Next, let us observe that, since (for all d ∈ Z) J(d)
X is a JX-torsor, considering the action
of JX on J(d)
X allows one to identify ΔJ(d)
X
with Δ JX . Thus, we have an exact sequence
1 → Δ JX → ΠJ(1)
X
→ ΓK → 1
If we consider (for nonzero d), the morphism J(1)
X → J(d)
X given by multiplication byd,w e
see that the result of pushing forward this sequence by means of the morphism ΔJX
d
→ Δ JX
(i.e., multiplication by d) gives rise to an exact sequence which can be naturally identiﬁed
with the exact sequence
1 → Δ J(d)
X
=Δ JX → ΠJ(d)
X
→ ΓK → 1
This completes our review of Jacobians and their fundamental groups.
Now recall from the deﬁnition of ZX[0] in Section 3 that ZX[0] may be identiﬁed with
the weight zero portion of Δ JX ⊗Zp
ˆ
K. In particular, one has a natural Γ K-equivariant
morphism Δ JX → ZX[0]. Thus, by pushing forward the exact sequence of the preceding
paragraph (ford = 1) by means of this morphism, we obtain a morphism of exact sequences
of topological groups as follows:
1 −→ Δ JX −→ ΠJ(1)
X
−→ ΓK −→ 1
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓ 1
1 −→ Z
X[0] −→ ΠZ
J(1)
X
−→ ΓK −→ 1
Next, we would like to consider sections of ΠJ(1)
X
→ ΓK and ΠZ
J(1)
X
→ ΓK. Recall that the
diﬀerence between any two sections of ΠJ(1)
X
→ ΓK (respectively, ΠZ
J(1)
X
→ ΓK)i sg i v e nb y
an element of H1(K, Δ JX ) (respectively, H1(K, ZX[0])). Moreover, if θL,θM :Γ → ΠJ(1)
X
are sections that arise from geometric points L, M∈ J(1)
X (K), then the diﬀerence
δ
def
= θL − θM ∈ H1(K, Δ JX )
29

maps to zero in H1(K, ZX[0]) ([BK], Example 3.11 – cf. the proof of Lemma 4.1 for some
more details). Thus, it follows that the section θL[0] : Γ K → ΠZ
J(1)
X
obtained from θL
by composing θL with Π J(1)
X
→ ΠZ
J(1)
X
is independent (up to composition with an inner
automorphism of Π Z
J(1)
X
arising from ZX[0] ⊆ ΠZ
J(1)
X
) of the choice of L.I n p a r t i c u l a r ,as
long as J(1)
X (K) is nonempty (which is the case here, since XK(K) has been assumed to
be nonempty), we thus obtain a canonical section(well-deﬁned up to composition with an
inner automorphism of ΠZ
J(1)
X
arising from ZX[0] ⊆ ΠZ
J(1)
X
)
θgeom :Γ K → ΠZ
J(1)
X
of ΠZ
J(1)
X
→ ΓK.
Now let θ :Γ K → ΠJ(1)
X
be an arbitrary section, and let θ[0] : ΓK → ΠZ
J(1)
X
denote
the section induced by θ. Then taking the diﬀerence between θ[0] and θgeom deﬁnes a
cohomology class
δθ ∈ H1(K, ZX[0]) = H0
(where the last equality follows from Lemma 2.3, applied in the case RK = K). Now we
have the following result:
Lemma 4.1. Suppose that the residue ﬁeld k is ﬁnite. Then there exists a geometric
point L∈ J(1)
X (K) such that θ= θL if and only if δθ =0 .
Proof. This follows immediately from the theory of [BK], §3, especially Example 3.11,
plus the following observation: If H is (as in Section 3) the ΓK-module that arises as the
abelianization of Δ X,t h e n
Ker{H1(K,H ) → H1(K,H ⊗ B+
DR)}
(i.e., by Lemma 3.8.1 of [BK], “H1
g ” in the notation of [BK]) is equal to
Ker{H1(K,H ) → H1(K,H ⊗ ˆ
K)= H1(K, ZX[0])}
(where the last equality follows from Proposition 2.4 and Lemma 2.2 (ii) (forn =1 , j = 1)).
Indeed, this equality of kernels follows by using the natural ﬁltration on B+
DR (whose
subquotients are equal to ˆ
K(i), i ≥ 0), together with the fact that H1(K,H ⊗ ˆ
K(i)) = 0
for i> 0 (by Proposition 2.4, Lemma 2.2 (ii) (for n =1 , j> 0)). ⃝
30

Now, we return to considering the sectionα :Γ K → ΠXK .L e tβ :Γ K → ΠXK be any
section that arises from some geometric point x ∈ XK(K). We would like to compare α
and β, and, in particular, show that, under the assumption (∗)spl, α and β are, in some
sense (to be speciﬁed precisely below), relatively close.L e tζ:Γ K → Δ X be the continuous
function (not necessarily a group homomorphism) such that
α(γ)= ζ(γ) · β(γ) ∈ ΠXK
for all γ ∈ ΓK.
Now let φ ∈ ZX( ˆ
K). If γ ∈ ΓK, then let us write γα(φ) ∈ ZX( ˆ
K) (respectively,
γβ(φ) ∈ ZX( ˆ
K)) for the result of letting γ act on φ by means of the action deﬁned by α
(respectively, β). Note that it follows from the construction of Section 3 that we have a
natural morphism ΔX → ZX( ˆ
K). For ϵ ∈ Δ X, let us denote by ϵZ ∈ ZX( ˆ
K) the image of
ϵ in ZX( ˆ
K). Then we have the following:
Lemma 4.2. We have: γα(φ)= ζ(γ)Z · γβ(φ) · ζ(γ)−1
Z .
Proof. Indeed, this follows immediately from the fact that the respective actions of Γ K
on ZX( ˆ
K) are induced by conjugation by α(γ)a n dβ(γ)i n s i d eΠXK . ⃝
Let α′ :Γ K → ΠXK be any section of Π XK → ΓK,a n dl e tα′
Z :Γ K → ΠZ
J(1)
X
be the
section obtained by composing α′ with ΠXK → ΠZ
J(1)
X
. Then we make the following
Deﬁnition 4.3. We shall call α′ J-geometric if α′
Z coincides with θgeom (up to compo-
sition with an inner automorphism of ΠZ
J(1)
X
arising from ZX[0] ⊆ ΠZ
J(1)
X
).
The following result is the main technical observation that made it possible to substantially
strengthen the result of [Mzk2].
Proposition 4.4. Let α :Γ K → ΠXK be a continuous group homomorphism that deﬁnes
a section of ΠXK → ΓK.T h e nα satisﬁes (∗)spl if and only if α is J-geometric.
Proof. Let φ ∈ ZX( ˆ
K)b e β-invariant, i.e., invariant under the action of ΓK on ZX( ˆ
K)
deﬁned by β. We would like to calculate the action of ΓK on φ that is induced byα.T h u s ,
for γ ∈ ΓK, we have, by Lemma 4.2:
γα(φ)= ζ(γ)Z · γβ(φ) · ζ(γ)−1
Z
= ζ(γ)Z · φ · ζ(γ)−1
Z
31

Thus, γα(φ) · φ−1 =[ ζ(γ)Z,φ] (where the brackets denote the “commutator”). Note that
[ζ(γ)Z,φ] ∈ ZX[1]( ˆ
K)= ZX[1] = ∧2 ZX[0] = (∧2 H0) ⊗K
ˆ
K
Now it remains to reinterpret the calculation just performed in terms of cohomology classes.
Recall the class
ηα ∈H ∨
0 ⊗K ∧2H0 = HomK(H0, ∧2H0)
discussed in Section 3. Let φ[0] be the image of φ ∈ ZX( ˆ
K)i n ZX[0]( ˆ
K)= ZX[0]. Since
φ is β-invariant, it follows that φ[0] is a ΓK-invariant element of ZX[0], hence belongs to
H0 ⊆H 0 ⊗K
ˆ
K = ZX[0]. Let δα
def
= αZ −θgeom ∈ H1(K, ZX[0]) = H0. Then it is immediate
from the deﬁnitions that the calculation of the preceding paragraph, interpreted in terms
of cohomology classes, becomes:
η
α(φ[0]) = δα ∧ (φ[0])
(Note that since θgeom may be computed – cf. the discussion preceding Lemma 4.1 – using
the geometric section β, it follows that δα is precisely the cohomology class deﬁned by the
image of the cocycle ζ(−)Z :Γ K → ZX( ˆ
K)i n ZX[0]( ˆ
K)= ZX[0].) Next observe that this
equation holds for all β-invariant φ, and that every element of H0 ⊆H 0 ⊗K
ˆ
K = ZX[0] =
ZX[0]( ˆ
K) lifts to a β-invariant φ ∈ ZX( ˆ
K). (Indeed, this follows from Proposition 3.5
since β arises from a point of XK(K).) Thus, it follows that ηα : H0 →H 0 ∧H0 is simply
the map “ δα ∧.” In particular, ηα = 0 if and only if δα = 0. This completes the proof of
the Proposition. ⃝
Remark. So far here we have been dealing with the truncated weight zero quotient ΔX →
ZX, but it would be interesting also to see what happens in the case of the fullnontruncated
weight zero quotient Δ X → Z∞
X (as in the Remark at the end of Section 3). For instance,
if the action of α on Z∞
X is such that Z∞
X has “enough invariants” (i.e., there exists a pro-
algebraic group G over K such that G ⊗K
ˆ
K is ΓK-equivariantly isomorphic to Z∞
X ), does
it follow that α itself automatically comes from a geometric point x ∈ XK(K)? Although
such questions are beyond the scope of this paper, it is the opinion of the author that
such questions deserve further study. Note that this sort of issue is closely related to the
so-called Section Conjecture – cf. the Remark following Theorem 19.1 for more details on
this conjecture.
32

Section 5: The J-Geometricity of K-V alued Points
Let K be a p-adic ﬁeld with perfect residue ﬁeld. Let XK and YK be proper hyperbolic
curves over K.L e t UK be the K-scheme obtained by localizing XK at its generic point.
Thus, the underlying topological space ofUK consists of one point, and the ring of functions
on UK is the function ﬁeld KX of XK. Note in particular that we can consider ΠUK ,Π YK .
In particular, ΠUK is a certain quotient of the absolute Galois group ofKX. Let us assume
that we are given a continuous open homomorphism
θ:Π UK → ΠYK
over ΓK. In this Section, we would like to begin the proof of the main theorem of this
paper by showing that any such θ necessarily “maps geometric sections to J-geometric
sections.” (Naturally, we will explain below precisely what is meant by the expression in
quotes.)
First observe that if x ∈ X
K(K)i sa n yK-valued point, then we can form the com-
pletion (KX )x of the ﬁeld KX with respect to the valuation deﬁned by x.M o r e o v e r , w e
have a natural morphism Π(KX )x
→ ΠUK (well-deﬁned up to composition with conjugation
by an element of Δ U ) whose image is “the” (more rigorously: any of the various conju-
gate) decomposition group associated to x. Moreover, as is well-known (see, e.g., [Ser2]),
(KX )x is (noncanonically) isomorphic to K((t)) (where t is an indeterminate), so Δ(KX)x
may be identiﬁed with Zp(1). In particular, by forming, relative to some isomorphism
(KX )x ∼= K((t)), the ﬁeld extension of ( KX )x corresponding to adjoining a compatible
system of p-power roots of t to K((t)), one sees immediately that Π (KX)x
→ ΓK admits
many sections.
Deﬁnition 5.1. We shall refer to as geometric any section ΓK → ΠUK of ΠUK → ΓK
obtained by composing a section of Π(KX)x
→ ΓK with (any one of the conjugate natural
homomorphisms) Π(KX)x
→ ΠUK .
Note, in particular, that Π (KX )x
→ ΠXK factors through ΓK, so in particular, the com-
posite αX :Γ K → ΠXK with ΠUK → ΠXK of any geometric section αU :Γ K → ΠUK is
induced by some point x : Spec(K) → XK.
Let αU :Γ K → ΠUK be a geometric section.B y c o m p o s i n gαU with θ,w eo b t a i na
section αY :Γ K → ΠYK . In this Section, we would like to prove that αY is necessarily
J-geometric in the sense of Deﬁnition 4.3. To do this, let us ﬁrst observe that we have a
diagram of continuous morphisms
Δ U −→ ZX( ˆ
K)
⏐⏐
↓
θ|ΔU
Δ Y −→ ZY ( ˆ
K)
33

which are compatible with the Γ K-actions deﬁned by αU and αY on the all the groups
involved. (Here, the upper horizontal morphism is obtained by composing ΔU → Δ X with
Δ X → ZX( ˆ
K).) Then we have the following
Lemma 5.2. There exists a (natural) surjective ΓK-homomorphism ZX( ˆ
K) → ZY ( ˆ
K)
that makes the above diagram commute.
Proof. Observe that the kernel of ΔU → Δ X is generated by inertia groups (i.e., images of
the various Δ(KX)x
→ Δ U ), and the action of ΓK on an inertia group is via the cyclotomic
character, i.e., (in the language of Hodge-Tate Galois representations) of weight one.I t
thus follows (from Lemma 2.2 (ii), for n =0 , j = −1) that the morphism Δ U → ZY ( ˆ
K)
(obtained from the diagram above) factors through Δ X. Hence, we obtain a morphism
Δ X → ZY ( ˆ
K). But now, it follows immediately (by the universal property of the truncated
Malˇcev completion, plus “weight arguments”) from the construction of ZX( ˆ
K)f r o mΔX
that this morphism Δ X → ZY ( ˆ
K) factors naturally through ZX( ˆ
K). This shows the
existence of a morphism as claimed in the statement of the Lemma. The fact that this
morphism is surjective follows from the fact thatθis open (which implies that the induced
morphism Δ ab
U → Δab
Y on abelianizations is open, hence surjective after tensoring with
Qp). ⃝
Lemma 5.3. The action of ΓK on ZY ( ˆ
K) deﬁned by αY satisﬁes the condition (∗)spl
discussed in Section 4.
Proof. Indeed, that the action of Γ K on ZX( ˆ
K) deﬁned by αX satisﬁes ( ∗)spl follows
from Proposition 3.5. Thus, Lemma 5.3 follows from the surjectivity of the morphism of
Lemma 5.2. ⃝
Proposition 5.4. Let θ:Π
UK → ΠYK be a continuous open homomorphism over ΓK,
αU :Γ K → ΠUK a geometric (Deﬁnition 5.1) section, and αY :Γ K → ΠYK the composite
of αU with θ.T h e nαY is J-geometric (Deﬁnition 4.3).
Proof. This follows by combining Lemma 5.3 with Proposition 4.4. ⃝
Section 6: F-Geometricity and FI-Geometricity
Let K be a ﬁnite extension of Qp.L e t S
def
= Spec( R), where R is an OK-algebra
noncanonically isomorphic to OK[[t]] (and t is an indeterminate). Let ηS be the generic
34

point of S (regarded as a scheme). Let Γ S
def
= π1(SK)( w h e r eSK
def
= S ⊗OK K,a n dt h e
“ π1” is with respect to some base-point which we omit to simplify notation); let Γ ηS be
the absolute Galois group of K(ηS) (the function ﬁeld of S). Thus, Γ S can be naturally
regarded as a quotient of Γ ηS .I f H ⊆ ΓηS is an open subgroup corresponding to some
ﬁnite ´etale covering ηS′ → ηS, then we shall write Γ ηS′ for H; S′ = Spec(R′) for the
normalization of S in ηS′ ;a n dΓS′ for the quotient of ΓηS′ corresponding to ´etale coverings
of S′
K
def
= S′ ⊗OK K.T h u s ,S′ is ﬁnite and ﬂat (since S is regular of dimension 2, and R′
is normal, hence an R-module of depth 2) over S.
Remark. For the reader familiar with [Mzk2], we remark that this Section and the next
are, in some sense, a generalization of Section 5 of [Mzk2], and play a comparable role in
the present paper to that of Section 5 in [Mzk2]. For the reader not familiar with [Mzk2],
we remark that, nevertheless, we do not assume any knowledge of [Mzk2] in the following
discussion.
We begin by considering a continuous Z
p[ΓηS ]-module V ,w h e r eV ,a sa Zp-module,
is a ﬁnite and free.
Deﬁnition 6.1. We shall refer to V as potentially geometric if there exists some open
subgroup ΓηS′ ⊆ ΓηS such that the Γ ηS′ -module obtained by restricting the Γ ηS -action
on V to ΓηS′ arises as the Tate module of some p-divisible group G → Spec(OK′ ), where
K′ ⊆ R′
K is a ﬁnite extension of K.
Note, in particular, that the ΓηS′ -action onV then factors through the quotient ΓηS′ → ΓS′ .
Moreover, if V is potentially geometric, then we may make the following construction: Let
us write G for the (not necessarily connected) formal group (over OK′ ) associated to the
p-divisible group G → Spec(OK′ ) of Deﬁnition 6.1. Thus, we have a natural isomorphism
(of ﬁnite ﬂat group schemes over OK′ ) between the kernels
G[pn] ∼= G[pn]
of multiplication by pn (for all n ≥ 0) on G and G. In particular, if we consider the exact
sequence (generalizing the Kummer sequence, which corresponds to the case where G is
the formal group associated to the multiplicative group Gm)
0 −→ G [pn] −→ G
pn
−→ G −→ 0
as an exact sequence of sheaves on the ﬁnite ﬂat site of S′, then we get a natural map
G(S′) → H1
ﬂat(S′, G[pn])
35

(where the cohomology group is relative to the ﬁnite ﬂat topology on S′)f o rn ≥ 0. Since
´etale morphisms are quasi-ﬁnite and ﬂat, we also have a natural morphism
H1
ﬂat(S′, G[pn]) → H1
et(S′, G[pn]K′ )
Thus, if we compose the above two morphisms, take the inverse limit with respect to n,
and use the fact that H1
et(S′, −) ∼= H1(ΓS′ , −), we get a natural morphism
κG : G(S′) → H1(ΓS′ ,V )
which one may regard as a generalization of the Kummer map (from units of a ﬁeld to a
certain Galois cohomology group of the ﬁeld).
Remark. Note that when the formal group G arises from an abelian variety over OK′ ,
then the cohomology class that one obtains by applying κG to a point of G coincides with
the cohomology class that one obtains (cf. the discussion of Section 4) by looking at the
morphism induced on arithmetic fundamental groups by the corresponding point of the
abelian variety. Indeed, this is a matter of general nonsense – cf., e.g., [Naka2], Claim
(2.2); [NTs], Lemma (4.14).
Deﬁnition 6.2. Suppose that V is potentially geometric, and that Γ
ηS′ ⊆ ΓηS is as in
Deﬁnition 6.1. Then we deﬁne
H1
f (S′
K,V ) ⊆ H1(S′
K,V )
def
= H1(ΓS′ ,V )
to be the subset of elements ζ ∈ H1(S′
K,V ) such that some nonzero multiple of ζ lies in
the image of G(S′) under the morphism κG.
Now let XηS → ηS be a proper hyperbolic curve over ηS such that for some open
ΓηS′ ⊆ ΓηS , and some proper, hyperbolic curve Z → Spec(K′)( w h e r eK′ ⊆ R′
K is a ﬁnite
extension of K, and we assume that Z(K′) ̸= ∅), we have an isomorphism of ηS′ -curves
XηS ×ηS ηS′ ∼= Z ×K′ ηS′
Then we make the following technical
Deﬁnition 6.3. We shall call XηS irreducibly splittable if for some open Γ ηS′ ⊆ ΓηS ,
and some proper, hyperbolic curve Z → Spec(K′)( w h e r eK′ ⊆ R′
K is a ﬁnite extension of
K, and we assume that Z(K′) ̸= ∅), we have an isomorphism of ηS′ -curves
XηS ×ηS ηS′ ∼= Z ×K′ ηS′
36

and, moreover, the (induced) map S′ → Spec(OK′ ) satisﬁes: (i) S′ → Spec(OK′ )a d m i t s
a section; (ii) the morphism S′ → Spec(OK′ ) has geometrically irreducible ﬁbers.
As usual, we have an exact sequence
1 → Δ XηS
= HX → ΠXηS
→ ΓηS → 1
where we write HX for the abelianization of Δ XηS
.T h u s ,HX has a natural structure of
continuous ΓηS -module. Moreover, as a Zp-module, it is free of rank 2gX (where gX is the
genus of XηS ). Let us write
HX → HI
X
for the quotient ofHX by all elements ofHX on which some open subgroup of ΓηS acts via
the cyclotomic character.( T h e “I” comes from the fact that HI
X is obtained by forming
the quotient of HX by all of its “inertia-like” subgroups.)
Next, let
HF
X ⊆ HX
be the largest ΓηS -submodule of HX which has no nonzero torsion-free quotientsHF
X → Q
such that some open subgroup of Γ ηS acts trivially on Q. (Here, the “ F” stands for
“ﬁnite .” This is because HF
X corresponds to the portion of HX that (potentially) extends
to a p-divisible group – i.e., a direct limit of ﬁnite ﬂat group schemes – over OK′ .) Then
it is well-known (see, e.g., [FC], Chapter III) that HF
X and HI
X are Cartier-dual to one
another, and, moreover, thatHF
X is potentially geometric(Deﬁnition 6.1). (Indeed, in [FC],
Chapter III, one ﬁnds a discussion of how one may obtain (in a natural fashion) abelian
varieties over K
′ as “quotients” (by some group of periods) of semi-abelian varieties that
(potentially) extend overOK′ in such a way that the dimensions of their toral parts are the
same over the generic and special points ofOK′ . If we apply this theory to the JacobianJZ
of the curve Z,t h e nHF
X is the Tate module of this semi-abelian variety (that potentially
extends over OK′ ).) Since HI
X is the Cartier dual of HF
X, it thus follows that HI
X is also
potentially geometric.
Let
HFI
X ⊆ HI
X
be the image of HF
X in HI
X. Thus, we have a surjection HF
X → HFI
X ,a n d HFI
X is also
potentially geometric. Finally, let
HM
X
def
=K e r (HX → HI
X) ⊆ HF
X
37

(Here, the “ M” stands for “multiplicative.” This is because HM
X arises from the portion
of HF
X that corresponds to twisted copies of (the Tate module of) the multiplicative group
Gm.) HM
X is also potentially geometric.
Next, we would like to consider asection α :Γ ηS → ΠXηS
of ΠXηS
→ ΓηS . Now recall
the isomorphism
XηS ×ηS ηS′ ∼= Z ×K′ ηS′
By composing α|ΓηS′ :Γ ηS′ → ΠXηS
with the projection Π XηS
→ ΠZ induced by this
isomorphism, we thus obtain a morphism ΓηS′ → ΠZ, whose composite with ΠZ → ΓK′ is
the natural morphism ΓηS′ → ΓK′ . Now let us make the following assumption on α:
(∗)S′
This morphism ΓηS′ → ΠZ factors through ΓS′ .
Let us denote the resulting morphism by β :Γ S′ → ΠZ.
Now let γ :Γ S′ → ΠZ be any morphism obtained by composing the natural morphism
ΓS′ → ΓK′ with some section Γ K′ → ΠZ arising from a geometric point ∈ Z(K′). Let
βJ ,γJ :Γ S′ → ΠJ(1)
Z
be the morphisms obtained by composing β and γ, respectively, with
ΠZ → ΠJ(1)
Z
. Then the diﬀerence βJ − γJ deﬁnes an element
δZ ∈ H1(S′
K,HZ )
hence an element
δX ∈ H1(S′
K,HX )
whose image in H1(S′
K,H I
X ) we denote by δI
X.
Deﬁnition 6.4. Suppose that α :Γ ηS → ΠXηS
is a section that satisﬁes the assump-
tion (∗)S′
above. Then we shall call αF -geometric (respectively, FI -geometric) if some
nonzero multiple of δX (respectively, δI
X) lies in the image of H1
f (S′
K,H F
X) (respectively,
H1
f (S′
K,H FI
X )) in H1(S′
K,HX) (respectively, H1(S′
K,H I
X)).
Note that if α is F-geometric, it is also automatically FI -geometric. Also, let us observe
that the deﬁnition of “ F-geometric” or “FI -geometric” is independent of the choice of γ
(cf. Lemma 4.1 and the discussion preceding it). Indeed, to see this, it suﬃces to verify
that some nonzero multiple of the class ∈ H
1(S′
K,HX) arising from the diﬀerence of two
γ’s lies inH1
f (S′
K,H F
X). But the diﬀerence of twoγ’s (both of which arise from a geometric
point ∈ Z(K′)) deﬁnes a point ∈ JZ(K′)( w h e r eJZ is the Jacobian ofZ). Moreover, since
the residue ﬁeld of K′ is ﬁnite , it follows that some nonzero multiple of this point inJZ(K′)
38

extends to an OK′ -valued point of the N´eron model JZ of JZ over OK′ which maps the
special point of Spec( OK′ )t ot h ei d e n t i t yo fJZ. On the other hand, since GF – i.e., the
“ G” (cf. the discussion following Deﬁnition 6.1) for the potentially geometric module HF
X
– is simply the formal group deﬁned by JZ, it thus follows that such a point ∈J Z(OK′ )
deﬁnes a point in GF (OK′ ) ⊆G F (S′). Thus, by Deﬁnition 6.2, we see that the diﬀerence
between the two γ’s lies in H1
f (S′
K,H F
X ), as desired.
Proposition 6.5. Suppose that XS is irreducibly splittable (cf. Deﬁnition 6.3). Then
any FI -geometric α is also F-geometric.
Proof. First, let us state that throughout the proof, “S′” will be a ﬁxed S′ satisfying the
conditions of Deﬁnition 6.3. Next, let us observe that the cokernel of the natural morphism
H1
f (S′
K,H F
X) → H1
f (S′
K,H FI
X )
is torsion. Indeed, this follows from Deﬁnition 6.2 and the fact that if GF and GFI are
the respective formal groups as in Deﬁnition 6.2, then the natural morphism GF →G FI is
formally smooth (hence surjective on S′-valued points).
Thus, if we start with a class ζ ∈ H1(S′
K,HX ) whose image ζI ∈ H1(S′
K,H I
X) lies
in the image of H1
f (S′
K,H FI
X ), then (after replacing ζ by a nonzero multiple of ζ), we
may assume that there exists a ζ′ ∈ H1(S′
K,HX) such that: (a.) ζ′ lies in the image
of H1
f (S′
K,H F
X ); (b.) ζ′ − ζ maps to 0 in H1(S′
K,H I
X). Moreover, by the deﬁnition of
HM
X
def
=K e r (HX → HI
X), it follows that (b.) may be rewritten in the form: “ ζ′ − ζ lies in
the image of H1(S′
K,H M
X )i n H1(S′
K,HX).”
With these observations in hand, it follows that it suﬃces to prove that
(∗)im The image of H1(S′
K,H M
X )i n H1(S′
K,HX) is contained up to
torsion (i.e., up to multiplication by a nonzero integer) in the image of
H
1
f (S′
K,H F
X )i n H1(S′
K,HX).
Note ﬁrst that by replacing K′ by a ﬁnite extension of K′ (and thus also enlarging S′ –
note that this does not aﬀect the validity of the conditions (i) and (ii) of Deﬁnition 6.3),
we may assume that the action of ΓS′ on HM
X (−1) (where the “( −1)” is a Tate twist) is
trivial. (Thus, in particular, as a ΓS′ -module, HM
X is isomorphic to a direct sum of a ﬁnite
number of copies of Zp(1).) On the other hand, by Lemma 6.6 below (and the Kummer
exact sequence), it follows thatH1(S′
K, Zp(1)) = {(R′
K)×}∧ (where the “∧” denotesp-adic
completion) is generated up to torsion by H1
f (S′
K, Zp(1)) = {(R′)×}∧ and (the image of)
H1(K′, Zp(1)) = {(K′)×}∧. Thus, it follows that H1(S′
K,H M
X ) is generated up to torsion
by H1
f (S′
K,H M
X ) and (the image of) H1(K′,H M
Z ).
Next, observe thatthe image ofH1(K′,H M
Z ) in H1(K′,HZ ) is contained up to torsion
in the image of H1
f (K′,H F
Z ) in H1(K′,HZ ). Indeed, this follows from the theory of [BK],
39

§3 (cf. the proof of Lemma 4.1). Namely, since HM
Z is “of weight one,” the image of
HM
Z ⊆ HZ in the weight zero component of HZ ⊗ ˆ
K is zero, so any cohomology classes
in H1(K′,H M
Z ) go to zero in H1(K′, −) of the weight zero component of HZ ⊗Zp
ˆ
K.B u t
this means (as we saw in Lemma 4.1), that such cohomology classes arise geometrically,
as desired. (Note that, by the above argument involving N´eron models (in the discussion
immediately preceding Proposition 6.5), it follows that (relative to pulling back cohomology
classes over K
′ to cohomology classes over S′
K), the notation “ H1
f (S′
K, −)” of Deﬁnition
6.2 is consistent with the notation “H1
f (K′, −)” of [BK], §3.)
Putting everything together, we thus see that (∗)im has been veriﬁed. This completes
the proof of the Proposition. ⃝
Lemma 6.6. For S′ satisfying condition (ii) of Deﬁnition 6.3, we have that (R′
K)× is
generated up to torsion by (R′)× and (K′)×.
Proof. Indeed, condition (ii) of Deﬁnition 6.3 implies that if π is a uniformizing element
of OK′ ⊆ R′, then the ideal π · R′ is contained in a unique prime ideal of height one ofR′.
Let us denote this prime ideal by ℘.L e t x ∈ R′ be an element which becomes a unit in
R′
K.T h e nx is invertible at every height one prime of R′ except (possibly) ℘.M o r e o v e r ,
by replacing x by some xn (where n is independent of x), we may assume that x has the
same valuation as πm (for some nonnegative integer m) in the discrete valuation ring R′
℘.
It thus follows that π−m · x is a unit at every height one prime of R′.S i n c eR′ is normal,
this implies that π−m · x ∈ (R′)×. This completes the proof of the Lemma. ⃝
Section 7: F rom F-Geometricity to Line Bundles
In this Section, we use some elementary algebraic geometry (Lemmas 7.1 and 7.2)
to translate the rather abstract and technical condition of “ F-geometricity” into a more
tractable existence criterion (Proposition 7.4) for line bundles. Let S be the spectrum of a
ﬁeld of characteristic zero. Let X → S be a proper hyperbolic curve of genusg over S.L e t
N be a ﬁxed positive integer. We would like to consider the natural morphism X → J(N)
X
(given by mapping a point x of X to the line bundle OX(N · x)). Taking the product of
this morphism with X (on the right), we obtain a morphism ξ: X ×S X → J(N)
X ×S X.
Lemma 7.1. There exists a line bundle onJ(N)
X ×S X whose pull-back via ξis a nonzero
tensor power of the line bundle D
def
= OX×SX(Δ) (where Δ ⊆ X ×S X)o n X ×S X.
Proof. First, let us take the product of ξ with one more copy of X on the right, to
obtain a morphism ξ′ : X ×S X ×S X → J(N)
X ×S X ×S X.F o r i, j =1 ,2,3 such that
40

i ̸= j,l e tΔ ij ⊆ X ×S X ×S X denote the diagonal given by setting equal the ith and
jth components of the triple product. Let Dij denote the line bundle OX×SX×SX(Δ ij).
In the triple product of X, we consider the second X to be the “true curve X”; the ﬁrst
X to be a “parameter space for the family of line bundles D12” (regarded as line bundles
on the “true curve” given by the second factor); and the third X to be a “base extension
X → S.” Over this extended base, the “true curve” acquires a “section” Δ 23.T h u s , i t
follows from the general theory of the Picard functor of a family of curves for which a
section exists that there exists a line bundle L′ on J(N)
X ×S X ×S X whose pull-back via ξ′
is equal to E′ def
=( D12 ⊗D −1
13 )⊗N .
Now let us consider the “determinant of the higher direct image sheaves” (cf. [MB],
§1, for an exposition of this notion) ofL′ and E′ for the morphismsX ×S X ×S X → X ×S X
and J(N)
X ×S X ×S X → J(N)
X ×S X given by forgetting the third factor. We denote the
respective “determinants of the higher direct image sheaves” ofL′ and E′ by L and E.T h u s ,
(by the functoriality of forming the “determinant of the higher direct image sheaves”) L
is a line bundle on J(N)
X ×S X such that ξ∗(L)= E. Moreover, I claim that we can write
E = D⊗N ⊗F
where F is a line bundle on X ×S X obtained by pulling back some ω⊗m
X/S (for m ∈ Z)
from the ﬁrst factor of X ×S X, and tensoring with the pull-back to X ×S X of some
line bundle M on S. Indeed, the “ D⊗N -term” arises from the fact that D12 is the pull-
back of D via the projection X ×S X ×S X → X ×S X under consideration. Then
the diﬀerence between the “determinants of the higher direct image sheaves” of the line
bundles D
−N
13 = OX×SX×SX(−N ·Δ13)a n dOX×S ×SX may be computed using the natural
inclusion
D−N
13 = OX×SX×SX(−N · Δ13) ⊆O X×S ×SX
By using the fact that the “determinant of the higher direct image sheaves” is multiplicative
on exact sequences, we thus obtain that this diﬀerence is equal to some power of the pull-
back to X ×
S X (via the projection to the ﬁrst factor) of OX×SX(−Δ) |Δ= X = ωX/S.O n
the other hand, the “determinant of the higher direct image sheaves” of the trivial line
bundle on X ×S X ×S X is clearly the pull-back (to X ×S X) of a line bundle M on S.
This gives us a line bundle F of the form discussed above, hence completes the proof of
the claim.
By replacing L with L⊗ OS M−1, we may assume that M is trivial. Moreover, by
Lemma 7.2 below, there exists a line bundle P on J(N)
X whose pull-back to X (via the
natural morphism X → J(N)
X ) is some nonzero tensor power of ωX/S. Thus, replacing L
by a tensor product of appropriate powers of L and (P|J(N)
X ×SX) completes the proof of
the Lemma. ⃝
41

Lemma 7.2. There exists a line bundle P on J(N)
X whose pull-back to X is a nonzero
tensor power of ωX/S.
Proof. Let us ﬁrst consider the case N = g − 1. In this case, we take P to be the line
bundle on J(g−1)
X deﬁned by the natural theta divisor on J(g−1)
X (i.e., the image of the
natural morphism from the (g − 1)-fold product of X to J(g−1)
X ). Then the fact that the
pull-back of P to X is equal to ω
⊗ 1
2 g(g−1)
X/S is an immediate consequence of [MB], Corollary
2.5: in the notation of loc. cit., we are interested here in the case where one takes n =0 ;
S = X;a n da : S → X to be the identity; then specializing the formula of loc. cit. to
the zero section of the Jacobian (note that the restriction of “U(a)
n ”i nloc. cit. to the zero
section of the Jacobian is trivial) proves the assertion concerning the pull-back of P to X.
Next, let us consider the case where N is divisible by g − 1. Then the morphism
X → J(N)
X factors through J(g−1)
X → J(N)
X . Moreover, it follows from the basic theory of
line bundles on abelian varieties (see, e.g., [AV], §23, the Corollary to Theorem 2 on p.
231) that a nonzero tensor power of the “P” considered in the previous paragraph descends
from J(g−1)
X to J(N)
X . This completes the proof in the case where N is divisible by g − 1.
Finally, we consider the case of arbitrary positive N. In this case, we have a natural
map J(N)
X → J(N(g−1))
X (multiplication by g − 1). But, by the preceding paragraph, we
already have a suitable “P”o nJ(N(g−1))
X . Thus, by pulling this line bundle back to J(N)
X ,
we obtain a suitable “ P”o nJ(N)
X . This completes the proof of the Lemma. ⃝
Next, we would like to consider a section α :Γ S
def
= π1(S) → ΠX of ΠX → ΓS.B y
composing α with π1(−) applied to X → J(N)
X , we obtain a section αN
J :Γ S → ΠJ(N)
X
.
Lemma 7.3. Suppose that αN
J arises from a geometric section ∈ J(N)
X (S). Then there
exists a line bundle on X of degree prime to p.
Proof. By taking the ﬁbered product (over ΓS)o f α with the identity on ΠX ,w eo b t a i na
morphism αX :Π X → ΠX×SX.S i n c eS is the spectrum of the ﬁeld, the group cohomology
of Π X×SX computes the p-adic ´etale cohomology of X ×S X (cf. Lemma 0.4). Thus,
we can form the arithmetic ﬁrst Chern class of the line bundle D of Lemma 7.1 (cf.
Deﬁnition 0.3): c1(D) ∈ H2(ΠX×S X, Zp(1)). Let ζ
def
= α∗
X(c1(D)) ∈ H2(ΠX , Zp(1)). On
the other hand, by composing αX with π1(−) of the morphism ξ, we obtain a morphism
αN
ξ :Π X → ΠJ(N)
X ×SX. Moreover, by assumption, αN
ξ arises from a geometric morphism
X → J(N)
X ×S X.T h u s , i fL is a line bundle onJ(N)
X ×S X, we obtain that (αN
ξ )∗(c1(L)) ∈
H2(ΠX, Zp(1)) can be written as c1(M), for some line bundle M on X. Now recall that
by Lemma 7.1, there exists a line bundleL on J(N)
X ×S X such that ξ∗L is a nonzero tensor
power of D. Thus, putting everything together, it follows that some nonzero multiple of
42

the abstract cohomology class ζ ∈ H2(ΠX, Zp(1)) can be written in the form c1(M)f o r
some line bundle M on X, i.e., m · ζ = c1(M) (for some nonzero m ∈ Z). Next, let
us recall that since ζ was constructed from D, the image of ζ under the “degree map”
H2(ΠX, Zp(1)) → H2(Δ X, Zp(1)) ∼= Zp is equal to 1, so deg( M)= m. Thus, we can
argue as follows (cf. [Mzk2], Lemma 6.1): Write m = a · pb,w h e r ea is an integer prime to
p,a n db is a nonnegative integer. Thus, c1(M) vanishes in H2(ΠX,(Z/pb Z)(1)). But, by
the Kummer exact sequence, this implies that there exists a line bundleP on X such that
P⊗pb
∼= M. In particular, deg( P)= p−b · deg(M)= a, so the existence of P completes
the proof of the Lemma. ⃝
Now let us consider the following situation: Let K be a ﬁnite extension of Qp.L e t
XK → Spec(K)a n dYK → Spec(K) be proper hyperbolic curves over K.L e t UK be the
generic point of XK. Moreover, let us assume that we have been given a continuous open
homomorphism over ΓK
θ:Π UK → ΠYK
Now let S, ηS be as at the beginning of Section 6. WriteXηS for XK ×K ηS (and similarly,
for UηS , YηS ). Then by base-change (note that Π UηS
=Π UK ×ΓK ΓηS ;Π YηS
=Π YK ×ΓK
ΓηS ), θinduces a continuous open homomorphism
θηS :Π UηS
→ ΠYηS
Let Y ′
ηS → YηS be a ﬁnite ´etale covering induced by some open subgroup of Π YηS
that
surjects onto Γ ηS . Note that θηS allows us to deﬁne the pull-back of Y ′
ηS → YηS to
UηS .L e t U′
ηS → UηS be a connected component of this pull-back which is geometrically
connected over ηS. Note that U ′
ηS → UηS extends to a ﬁnite (possibly ramiﬁed) covering
X′
ηS → XηS .T h u s ,X′
ηS is a proper hyperbolic curve over ηS. Let us suppose that Y ′
ηS
is irreducibly splittable (Deﬁnition 6.3). Then it follows immediately that X′
ηS is also
irreducibly splittable. (Indeed, the deﬁnition of “irreducibly splittable” only involves the
base (i.e., S, S′, etc.), plus ﬁnite ´etale coverings of the curve, i.e., it may be phrased
entirely in terms of (the base plus) fundamental groups. Thus, the fact that X′
ηS and
Y ′
ηS are related by θηS is enough to guarantee that “ Y ′
ηS irreducibly splittable =⇒ X′
ηS
irreducibly splittable.”)
Next, we would like to consider a section
αU :Γ ηS → ΠU ′
ηS
of ΠU ′
ηS
→ ΓηS .C o m p o s i n gαU with π1(−) of the natural morphismU′
ηS → X′
ηS gives rise
to a section αX :Γ ηS → ΠX′
ηS
.C o m p o s i n gαU with the morphism θ′
ηS :Π U ′
ηS
→ ΠY ′
ηS
induced by θηS gives a section αY :Γ ηS → ΠY ′ηS
.
43

The following key result is the culmination of our eﬀorts in Sections 1 through 7:
Proposition 7.4. Under the circumstances just described above, let us assume thatαX
is FI -geometric (Deﬁnition 6.4). Then it follows that Y ′
ηS admits a line bundle of degree
prime to p.
Proof. First observe that the morphism ΔU ′
ηS
→ Δ Y ′
ηS
→ HI
Y ′
ηS
(where HI
Y ′
ηS
is as in the
discussion preceding Deﬁnition 6.4) factors through HI
X′
ηS
. (Indeed, this follows by observ-
ing, as in the proof of Lemma 5.2, that the inertia groups of Δ U ′
ηS
map to zero in HI
Y ′
ηS
.)
Thus, we obtain a ΓηS -equivariant morphism HI
X′
ηS
→ HI
Y ′
ηS
. In particular, it follows by
using Tate’s theorem (i.e., Theorem 4 of [Tate] – that morphisms between Tate modules
of p-divisible groups induce morphisms between the p-divisible groups, hence morphisms
between the respective formal groups) thatH1
f (S′
K,H FI
X′
ηS
) maps to H1
f (S′
K,H FI
Y ′
ηS
), for any
ﬁnite ´etale covering ηS′ → ηS of ηS as in Deﬁnition 6.2.
Next, I claim that αY is FI -geometric. Indeed, this follows from Proposition 5.4,
plus the observation of the preceding paragraph. In words: This claim amounts to the
claim (cf. Deﬁnition 6.4) that the “ J-portion” ofαY (i.e., the result of composingαY with
ΠY ′
ηS
→ ΠJ(1)
Y ′
,w h e r eJ(1)
Y ′ is the Picard scheme of line bundles of degree 1 on Y ′
ηS )d i ﬀ e r s
from the “J-portion” of aconstant (i.e., arising from a point deﬁned over a ﬁnite extension
of K of the curve “Z” of the discussion of Section 6) geometric section of ΠY ′ηS
by a class
in H1
f (S′
K,H FI
Y ′ηS
). On the other hand, since we are operating under the assumption that
αX is FI -geometric, we know that the J-portion of αX diﬀers from the J-portion of a
constant geometric section of Π X′
ηS
by a class in H1
f (S′
K,H FI
X′
ηS
). Moreover, by Proposi-
tion 5.4, constant geometric sections of Π U ′
ηS
map to constant J-geometric (which is as
good as “geometric” for us, since we are only interested in “ J-portions” here) sections of
ΠY ′
ηS
. Thus, since (by the observation of the preceding paragraph) H1
f (S′
K,H FI
X′
ηS
) maps
to H1
f (S′
K,H FI
Y ′
ηS
), we conclude that αY is FI -geometric, as desired. This completes the
proof of the claim. Now since Y ′
ηS is also assumed to be irreducibly splittable, it follows
from Proposition 6.5 that αY is, in fact, F-geometric.
Now let us consider the morphism αN
J :Γ ηS → ΠJ(N)
Y ′
(where J(N)
Y ′ is the Picard
scheme of line bundles of degree N on Y ′
ηS ), for some N> 0, induced by composing αY
with Π Y ′
ηS
→ ΠJ(N)
Y ′
. Note that the F-geometricity of αY is, by deﬁnition, a property
concerning α1
J . By the deﬁnition of F-geometricity (Deﬁnition 6.4), it follows immediately
that if N is large enough, then αN
J arises from a geometric sectionJ(N)
Y ′ (SK). Indeed, the
large N is to take care of the phrase “nonzero multiple of” in Deﬁnitions 6.2 and 6.4, plus
the fact that a priori the geometric point whose existence is guaranteed by Deﬁnition 6.2
is only deﬁned over ηS′ , so we may need to apply the norm map (for ηS′ → ηS)t og e ta
44

geometric point over ηS,w h i c hm a yc a u s eN to increase again. Now, applying Lemma 7.3
completes the proof of the Proposition. ⃝
Remark. Note that Sections 6 and 7 are made much more technically diﬃcult by the
fact that we start with a morphism Π UK → ΠYK rather than a morphism Π XK → ΠYK .
Indeed, the whole business of distinguishing “ F-geometric” from “ FI -geometric” arises
because one does not have a proper theory of “ p-divisible groups of inﬁnite rank,” which
is the sort of object that one must deal with if one tries to work directly with HU (the
abelianization of ΔU ) without passing toHI
U . Similar technical problems (arising from the
fact that HU is of inﬁnite rank) also are the reason behind the lengthiness of Sections 11
and 12.
Section 8: F rom Line Bundles to T ame Points
In this Section, which is something of an appendix to that portion of the paper con-
stituted by Sections 1 through 7, we again apply some elementary algebraic geometry, this
time to pass from line bundles to rational points of the curve deﬁned over tamely ramiﬁed
extensions of the given ﬁeld. Thus, let M be a p-adic ﬁeld whose residue ﬁeld k
M is iso-
morphic to k((t)), where k is a ﬁnite ﬁeld, and t is an indeterminate. Let XM be a proper
hyperbolic curve over M. Then we have the following result:
Proposition 8.1. Suppose that XM admits a line bundle L of degree prime top.T h e n
there exists a tamely ramiﬁed extension M′ of M such that XM (M′) is nonempty.
Proof. By replacing L by an appropriate (prime to p) tensor power of the original L,w e
may assume that L is very ample. Thus, by Bertini’s Theorem, it follows that there exists
a divisor D ⊆ XM such that L ∼= OXM (D), and D is ´etale over M.L e tu sw r i t e
D =
r⋃
i=1
Di
where each Di = Spec(Mi). Thus, Mi is a ﬁnite ﬁeld extension of M.S i n c e d e g (D)i s
prime to p, it follows that at least one of the Mi (say, M1) is such that [M1 : M]i s prime
to p.L e t Mc be the Galois closure of M1 over M. Then it follows from the elementary
theory of p-adic ﬁelds (in particular, the fact that the wild inertia subgroup of Γ M is a
normal pro-p subgroup of ΓM , hence contained in any Sylow-pro-p subgroup of ΓM – see,
e.g., [Ser2], Chapter IV, §2) that Mc is tamely ramiﬁed over M. Thus, in particular, M1
is tamely ramiﬁed over M,a n d XM (M1) is nonempty. This completes the proof of the
Proposition. ⃝
45

Next, before continuing, we would like to discuss an auxiliary Lemma that will be
useful when we apply Proposition 8.1. Let us suppose that there exists a p-adic ﬁeld
L ⊆ M satisfying the following properties:
(1) We have an inclusion OL ⊆O M ,r e l a t i v et ow h i c hmL ·O M = mM .
(2) If kL is the residue ﬁeld of L,t h e nk ⊆ kL,a n dkL is a function ﬁeld in
one variable over k.
(3) The inclusion kL ⊆ kM is obtained by completing the function ﬁeld kL
at one of its k-valued points.
Let us suppose, moreover, that there exists a curve XL → Spec(L) such that XM =
XL ⊗L M. Then we have the following result:
Lemma 8.2. Suppose that there exists a tamely ramiﬁed extensionM′ of M of ramiﬁca-
tion index e such that XM (M′) is nonempty. Then there exists a tamely ramiﬁed extension
L′ of L of ramiﬁcation index e such that XL(L′) is nonempty.
Proof. Since tamely ramiﬁed extensions of M descend to tamely ramiﬁed extensions
of L, it is easy to see that without loss of generality, we may assume that e =1 ,a n d
M′ = M. Thus, we must show that XL admits a rational point over some unramiﬁed
extension of L. Note that since OL is a discrete valuation ring, it is well-known that XL
admits a regular model XL → Spec(OL). Let XM
def
= XL ⊗OL OM . Let us consider the
morphism φ : Spec(OM ) → Spec(OL). Since ﬁnitely generated algebras over a ﬁnite ﬁeld
are excellent, it follows that kM is separable over kL (i.e., the morphism Spec( kM ) →
Spec(kL) is geometrically regular). In particular, it follows that φ is geometrically regular.
Since the natural morphism XM →X L is obtained from φ by base-change, it thus follows
that it, too, is geometrically regular. Thus, the regularity of XL implies that of XM.N o w
the fact that XM (M) is nonempty (by assumption) implies that there exist points in the
special ﬁber of XM at which XM is smooth over OM . But this implies (by descent) that
there exist points in the special ﬁber of XL at which XL is smooth over OL, which, in turn,
implies that for some unramiﬁed extension L′ of L, XL(L′) is nonempty, as desired. ⃝
Section 9: Convergence via p-adic Hodge Theory
Whereas Sections 1 through 8 formed a unit devoted essentially to showing Propo-
sition 7.4, Sections 9 and 10 form a new unit, devoted to showing, by means of p-adic
Hodge theory, that certain types of sequences of points converge p-adically to a uniquely
determined point deﬁned over a relatively small ﬁeld. Thus, in particular, we shall start
with fresh hypotheses, as follows:
46

Let K be a p-adic local ﬁeld, with residue ﬁeld k.L e t L be a p-adic ﬁeld containing
K whose residue ﬁeld kL is a function ﬁeld in one variable over k. Let us also assume that
k is algebraically closed in kL,a n dt h a tmK ·O L = mL. Let us denote by
ΓL/K
def
=K e r ( ΓL → ΓK)=Γ L·
K
the “geometric” fundamental group ofL.L e tHΩ
L be the quotient ofH1(ΓL/K, ˆO
L(1)) by its
torsion submodule. Let XK → Spec(K) be a proper hyperbolic curve. LetXL
def
= XK ⊗KL.
Thus, as usual, we have a group extension (obtained by pulling back 1 → Δ X → ΠXK →
ΓK → 1 via ΓL → ΓK)
1 → Δ X → ΠXL → ΓL → 1
Let us assume that we are given a continuous, group homomorphism
α :Γ L → ΠXK
whose composite with the projection to ΓK is the natural morphism ΓL → ΓK. As usual, α
deﬁnes a section αs :Γ L → ΠXL of ΠXL → ΓL. Let us also assume thatα is nondegenerate
in the sense that it satisﬁes the following group-theoretic condition:
(∗)non The natural morphism H1(Δ X, Zp(1)) →H Ω
L induced by α is
nonzero.
Let Ltm be a maximal tamely ramiﬁed extension of L.L e t M
def
=( Ltm)∧ be its p-adic
completion. Since Ltm ·
 K is unramiﬁed over L ·
 K, and Galois cohomology “ignores
unramiﬁed extensions,” we have that
H1(ΓL/K, ˆO
L(1)) = H1(ΓL·
K, ˆO
L(1)) = H1(ΓLtm ·
K, ˆO
L(1))
In particular, since HΩ
L is a quotient of this cohomology module, it follows from assumption
(∗)non that α|ΓLtm·
K
:Γ Ltm ·
K → Δ X is nontrivial.
For n ≥ 0, let In
L
def
=I m (αs) ·(Δ X)<n> ⊆ ΠXL (cf. the discussion preceding Deﬁnition
0.2 for an explanation of the notation “<n> ”). Let ψn : Xn
L → XL be the corresponding
ﬁnite ´etale covering. Let X∞
L → XL be the inverse limit of the Xn
L. In this Section, we
would like to prove the following assertion:
(∗)con Suppose that we have a sequence of points {˜xn},w h e r e˜xn ∈
Xn
L(Ltm). Let xn
def
= ψn(˜xn) ∈ XL(Ltm). Then there exists a subse-
quence of {xn} which converges p-adically in XL(M).
47

(Note that by choosing any proper model over OL of XL,w eo b t a i nap-adic topology on
XL(Ltm) which is easily seen to be independent of the model chosen.)
By replacing K be a ﬁnite extension of K, we may make the following simplifying
assumptions:
(1) XK has stable reduction. We denote by X→ Spec(OK) the unique
stable extension of XK over OK. We denote by J→ Spec(OK)t h e
unique semi-abelian scheme overOK whose generic ﬁber is the Jacobian
of XK.
(2) XK(K)i sn o n e m p t y .
Note that replacing K by a ﬁnite extension of K does not aﬀect the validity of the con-
vergence assertion (∗)con.
Let us ﬁx an n ≥ 1. Let us consider the morphism xn : Spec(Ltm) → XK.T h i s
morphism induces a morphism
βn :Γ Ltm → ΠXK → ΠXK /(Δ X)<n>
which is well-deﬁned up to conjugation by an element of ΔX. Then it follows immediately
from the deﬁnitions (and the fact that xn arose from an Ltm-rational point of Xn
L)t h a t :
This morphism βn is equal to the composite of α|ΓLtm :Γ Ltm → ΠXK
with the natural projection ΠXK → ΠXK /(Δ X)<n>.
Thus, in particular, βn is independent of the choice of ˜xn. Moreover, by ( ∗)non, it follows
that by taking n to be suﬃciently large, we may assume that the restriction of βn to
ΓLtm ·
K (⊆ ΓLtm ) is nontrivial. This implies, in particular, that xn does not factor through
any ﬁnite extension of K.
Note that by properness, xn extends to a morphism ξn : Spec(OLtm ) →X .L e t Ktm
be the algebraic closure of K in Ltm.T h u s ,Ktm is a maximal tamely ramiﬁed extension
of K. Let us denote by ΩOLtm /OKtm the OLtm -module of p-adically continuous diﬀerentials
of OLtm over OKtm .T h u s ,ΩOLtm /OKtm is a free OLtm -module of rank one.
Lemma 9.1. By diﬀerentiating ξn, we obtain a natural morphism dξn : ξ∗
nωX/OK →
ΩOLtm /OKtm .
Proof. Suppose that xn is deﬁned over some ﬁnite tamely ramiﬁed extension L′ of L.
Suppose, moreover, that L′ contains a ﬁnite tamely ramiﬁed extension K′ of K such
that mK′ ·O L′ = mL′ . Then, if we equip Spec( OK), Spec( OK′ ) and Spec( OL′ )w i t h
the log structures deﬁned by the special points, and X with the log structure whose
monoid is the sheaf of functions invertible on the generic ﬁber, we obtain a log morphism
48

Spec(OL′ )log →X log compatible with ξn and Spec( OK′ )log → Spec(OK)log.M o r e o v e r ,
since ωX/OK =Ω Xlog/Spec(OK)log ,a n dΩOLtm /OKtm = OLtm ⊗OL′ ΩSpec(OL′)log/Spec(OK′)log ,
we thus obtaindξn by means of the functoriality of logarithmic diﬀerentials. The naturality
of dξn is easily checked by looking at the generic ﬁbers. ⃝
Let ΓΩ
X
def
= H0(X,ω X/OK ). Then we propose to prove in the present situation that
(∗)ind There exists a number n0 depending only on K such that for all
n ≥ n0, the natural morphism ΓΩ
X → ΩOLtm /OKtm ⊗ Z/pn−n0 Z induced
by dξn is independent of xn (i.e., depends only on α).
To keep the notation simple, let us note that by replacingK by a tamely ramiﬁed extension
of K, and then replacing L by an unramiﬁed extension of L, we may assume thatxn is, in
fact, deﬁned over L. (Note that replacing L and K by extensions in this fashion will not
aﬀect the validity of (∗)ind.) Thus, we shall regardxn and ξn as morphisms Spec(L) → XK
and Spec(OL) →X , respectively.
Let P
def
= P(ΓΩ
X ). (That is, P is the projective space over OK deﬁned by Γ Ω
X.)
Then there is (by the deﬁnition of Γ Ω
X) a natural ﬁnite morphism λK : XK → PK.L e t
N→ Spec(OK)b et h eN ´eron model of JX.T h u s ,J⊆ N is an open subscheme of N.
Since XK(K) is nonempty, we can use aK-rational point of XK to identify JX with J(1)
X .
Thus, we obtain a morphism XK ↪→N K = JX. By the deﬁning property of the N´ eron
model, and the fact that OL is geometrically regular over OK, it follows that composing
this morphism with xn gives rise to a morphism ζL : Spec(OL) →N .M o r e o v e r , ( a f t e r
possibly replacing K by a ﬁnite unramiﬁed extension of K), we may assume that there
exists some ζK : Spec(OK) →N such that ζK and ζL map the special points of Spec(OK)
and Spec(OL), respectively, to the same geometric connected component of the special ﬁber
of N. Thus, by translating byζK, we may assume that our identiﬁcation ofJX with J(1)
X is
such that ζL maps into J⊆ N . We denote the resulting morphism byjn : Spec(OL) →J .
Now let us consider the ΓK-module H1(X
K, Zp(1)) = H1(J
K, Zp(1)). Here, the iden-
tiﬁcation of H1(X
K, Zp(1)) with H1(J
K, Zp(1)) is the identiﬁcation induced by XK ↪→
J(1)
X
∼= JX. This identiﬁcation is the same as the standard identiﬁcation since translation
by K-valued points ofJ induces the identity onH1(J
K, Zp(1)). Let Hcb ⊆ H1(J
K, Zp(1))
be the maximal Zp-submodule such that Γ K acts on Hcb(−1) through a ﬁnite, unram-
iﬁed quotient . (Here, “cb” stands for “combinatorial.” Note that this inclusion Hcb ⊆
H1(J
K, Zp(1)) is Cartier-dual to the quotient HX → HX /HF
X (in the notation of the dis-
cussion following Deﬁnition 6.3 in Section 6).) By the theory of [FC], Chapter III, we know
that CX
def
= H1(J
K, Zp(1))/Hcb may be (ΓK-equivariantly) identiﬁed with H1(G
K, Zp(1))
for some semi-abelian scheme G→ Spec(OK) which can be represented as an extension
0 →T →G→A→ 0
49

of an abelian scheme A→ Spec(OK)b yat o r u sT→ Spec(OK). Moreover, the p-adic
completion ˆG of G is equal to the p-adic completion ˆJ of J . Indeed, relative to the
identiﬁcation ˆG = ˆJ , the identiﬁcation CX = H1(GK′ , Zp(1)) is obtained as follows: Given
a ﬁnite ´etale covering Q
K →J
 K,w el e t Q be the normalization of J in Q
K,s o Q is
ﬁnite over J . Thus, by p-adically completing, we obtain a formal morphism ˆQ→ ˆJ = ˆG
(whose relative diﬀerentials are annihilated by a power of p) which can be algebrized to
some ﬁnite R→G (whose relative diﬀerentials are annihilated by a power of p). Thus,
R
K →G
 K is ﬁnite ´etale. In other words, the correspondence between coverings given by
Q
K ↦→R
 K induces a morphism H1(J
K, Zp(1)) → H1(G
K, Zp(1)) whose kernel is Hcb,
and thus allows us to identify H1(G
K, Zp(1)) with CX.
Now by p-adically completing jn : Spec(OL) →J , applying ˆG = ˆJ , and then alge-
brizing, we thus obtain a morphismgn : Spec(OL) →G .M o r e o v e r ,gn induces a morphism
on cohomology groups
H1(gn): H1(G
K, Zp(1)) → H1(ΓL/K, Zp(1))
Thus, we have a commutative diagram of ΓK-modules:
H1(J
K, Zp(1))
H1(jn)
−→ H1(ΓL/K, Zp(1)) −→ H Ω
L ⊗ (Z/pnZ)
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
id
⏐
⏐
↓
id
H1(G
K, Zp(1))
H1(gn)
−→ H1(ΓL/K, Zp(1)) −→ H Ω
L ⊗ (Z/pnZ)
where the vertical morphism on the left is the natural projection discussed in the preceding
paragraph, and the horizontal morphisms on the right are the natural ones. Recall that
HΩ
L is, by deﬁnition, the quotient of H1(ΓL/K, ˆO
L(1)) by its torsion submodule. Now,
by sorting through the deﬁnitions (cf. the discussion preceding Lemma 9.1), it is clear
that the composite morphism on the upper row is completely determined by α (i.e., is
independent of the particular choice ofx
n). Thus, it follows that the composite morphism
on the bottom row gives rise to a morphism
ϵn : H1(G
K, ˆO
K(1)) →H Ω
L ⊗ Z/pnZ
which is completely determined by α. Moreover, since HΩ
L is p-adically separated(see Con-
sequence (2) of [Falt1] below), it follows (from (∗)non)t h a tϵn is nonzero for n suﬃciently
large.
Now, note that G is a smooth OK-scheme with an obvious compactiﬁcation
 G such
that
 G−G is a divisor with normal crossings. (Indeed, G is a product of Gm-torsors
over the OK-proper scheme A, so we simply compactify each of these Gm-torsors to a
P1-bundle.) In particular, it follows that we can apply the theory of [Falt1], in the case of
good reduction.
50

Remark. The argument of [Falt1] in the bad reduction case is known to have gaps, which
is one reason why we took pains to avoid applying [Falt1] toJK. Another reason is that in
the bad reduction case, one only has “ Qp-results,” not integral results (say, overZ/pnZ),
as we need here.
Let n′′
0 be an integer such that the p-adic valuation of the diﬀerent ofK over Qp is ≤
the p-adic valuation of pn′′
0 .L e tn′
0
def
= n′′
0 +o r dp(g!). Let n0
def
= n′
0 + 2. The consequences
of the theory of [Falt1] that we use are as follows:
(1) The ΓK-module H1(G
K,
K
∧
) is Hodge-Tate. Let us denote by HΩ
G the
quotient of H1(G
K, ˆO
K(1)) by the submodule that is contained in the
portion of H1(G
K,
K
∧
(1)) of weight 1. Thus, HΩ
G ⊗Zp Qp is of weight
0. Let Ω inv
G be the OK-module of invariant diﬀerentials (over OK)o n
the group scheme G. Then there is a natural ΓK-equivariant morphism
(Theorems 2.4 and 3.1 of II. of [Falt1])
Ωinv
G ⊗OK {(pn0 ·O
 K)/(pn0+n ·O
 K)}→H Ω
G ⊗ Z/pnZ
with an inverse “up to a factor of pn0 .” Here the point of the n0 is to
take care of the “ g! · ρ” of [Falt1]: the 2 = 1 + 1 added ton′
0 is to take
care of the 1
p−1 ≤ 1 that always arises, plus the additional e−1
e < 1t h a t
arise from the tame ramiﬁcation which we allow (see [Fo], Theorem 1 ′
for more details on the computation of [Falt1]’s “ρ”).
(2) HΩ
L is p-adically separated. Moreover, there is a natural ΓK-equivariant
morphism (Theorem 4.2 of I. of [Falt1])
ΩOL/OK ⊗OK {(pn0 ·O
 K)/(pn0+n ·O
 K)}→H Ω
L ⊗ Z/pnZ
with an inverse “up to a factor of pn0 .” In particular, by consid-
ering weights, it follows that ϵn factors through the quotient HΩ
G of
H1(G
K, ˆO
K(1)).
(3) The morphisms (and inverses up to a factor) of (1) and (2) are com-
patible with each other, ϵn, and the natural morphism Ωinv
G → ΩOL/OK
induced by diﬀerentiating gn. That is to say, we have a commutative
diagram:
Ωinv
G ⊗OK {(pn0 ·O
 K)/(pn0+n ·O
 K)}− → H Ω
G ⊗ Z/pnZ
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
ΩOL/OK ⊗OK {(pn0 ·O
 K)/(pn0+n ·O
 K)}− →H Ω
L ⊗ Z/pnZ
51

(where the horizontal morphisms are the morphisms of (1) and (2), re-
spectively, the vertical morphism on the left is induced by diﬀerentiating
gn, and the vertical morphism on the right is induced by ϵn).
These assertions allow us to immediately conclude (∗)ind, as follows: Sinceϵn is determined
by α, it thus follows that the morphism (induced by diﬀerentiatinggn)Ω inv
G → ΩOL/OK ⊗
(Z/pn−n0 Z) is determined by α. On the other hand, Ωinv
G can naturally be identiﬁed with
Ωinv
J . Moreover, Ω inv
J
can naturally be identiﬁed with Γ Ω
X
. This completes the proof of
(∗)ind.
Lemma 9.2. For n suﬃciently large, the morphism HΩ
G →H Ω
L
⊗ (Z/pnZ) induced by
ϵn is nonzero.
Proof. This follows formally from (∗)non. ⃝
Now we are ready to tackle the convergence assertion ( ∗)con.T h u s , w e g o b a c k t o
working over Ltm and Ktm. In particular, by composing xn with λK and applying the
valuative criterion for properness, we obtain a morphismλn : Spec(OLtm ) → P.M o r e o v e r ,
this OLtm -valued point λn of the projective space P is precisely the point deﬁned by the
morphism Ωinv
G → ΩOL/OK ⊗OL OLtm =Ω OLtm /OKtm (obtained by diﬀerentiating gn).
(Note that here we use the fact remarked above that Ω OLtm /OKtm is a free OLtm -module
of rank one.) Thus, ( ∗)ind and Lemma 9.2 imply that the points λn of P(OLtm ) converge
p-adically to a point λ∞ ∈ P( ˆOLtm )= P(M). On the other hand, by “Krasner’s Lemma”
(see, e.g., [Kobl], p. 70), since λK : XK → PK is ﬁnite , it follows that some subsequence
{xni } of {xn} converges to a point x∞ ∈ XK(M). This proves the assertion ( ∗)con,a s
desired.
In fact, we can say more. Form ≥ 1, let ˜xm
n be the image of ˜xn+m in Xm
L (Ltm) under
the natural morphism Xn+m
L → Xm
L . Thus, we obtain a sequence {˜xm
n } (in the index n)o f
points of Xm
L (Ltm). Since Xm
L → XL is ﬁnite, then by appying “Krasner’s Lemma” again,
see that a subsequence of the sequence {˜xm
n } converges p-adically in Xm
L (M). Moreover,
by the process of “Cantor diagonalization” (of elementary analysis), we thus see that we
have proven the following key result (which is the main result of this Section):
Lemma 9.3. We assume notation as in the ﬁrst paragraph of this Section. Suppose that
we have a sequence of points {˜xn},w h e r e˜xn ∈ Xn
L(Ltm). Then there exists a subsequence
{˜xni } of this sequence with the following property: For eachm ≥ 0, the sequence obtained
by projecting those ˜xni with ni ≥ m to Xm
L (M) converges to some ˜xm
∞ ∈ Xm
L (M).I n
particular, X∞
L (M) is nonempty.
Proof. The last assertion is proven by noting that the ˜xm
∞ ∈ Xm
L (M) form a compatible
system, hence deﬁne a point of ˜x∞
∞ ∈ X∞
L (M). ⃝
52

Finally, before proceeding, we make the following technically trivial, but important
observation: Since the arithmetic fundamental group of X∞
L is just ΓL (i.e., Im(αs)), it
follows that the morphism
ΓM → ΠXK
induced on fundamental groups by the image inXK(M) of any point (e.g.,˜x∞
∞ )o f X∞
L (M)
is none other than the restriction of α :Γ L → ΠXK to ΓM .
Section 10: Uniqueness and Rationality of the Limit Point
We continue with the notation of the preceding Section. In this Section, we would
like to show that the point˜x∞
∞ ∈ X∞
L (M) constructed in Lemma 9.3 is the unique element
of X∞
L (M), and that it in fact descends to a point of X∞
L (L). We remark that much of
the material of this Section is not absolutely logically necessary for the proof of the main
results of this paper, but is included partly for aesthetic reasons, and partly because its
inclusion (in the opinion of the author) makes the proof of the main results of the paper
more transparent.
First, let us make the trivial observation that any point inX
∞
L (M) arises as a ˜x∞
∞ (as
in Lemma 9.3) for some sequence of ˜xn ∈ Xn
L(Ltm). (Indeed, this follows by using the fact
that M =( Ltm)∧ to approximate the images of the given point in the various Xn
L(M)’s.)
Thus, without loss of generality, we can apply the results of the discussion of Section 9 to
our analysis of an arbitrary point of X∞
L (M).
Now recall the limit point λ∞ ∈ P(M) of the discussion following Lemma 9.2. This
limit point is clearly independent of the choice of the particular sequence {˜xn} under
consideration – i.e., it depends only on α. More precisely, λ∞ ∈ P(M) ⊆ P(
L
∧
)i st h e
point deﬁned by the surjection
ΓΩ
X ⊗OK
 L
∧
=Ω inv
G
⊗OK
 L
∧
= HΩ
G ⊗ ˆO
K
L
∧
→H Ω
L ⊗Zp Qp =Ω OL/OK ⊗OL
 L
∧
induced by α (cf. the discussion preceding Lemma 9.2). Note that Γ L acts naturally on
all of these modules, and that this surjection is Γ L-equivariant. Indeed, this follows by
transport of structure from the fact thatα is deﬁned on ΓL, not just on ΓLtm ·
K.T h u s ,w e
conclude the following
Lemma 10.1. The image λ∞ ∈ P(M) of ˜x∞
∞ ∈ X∞
L (M) under the natural morphism
X∞
L → XK → PK is independent of ˜x∞
∞ and, moreover, λ∞ is deﬁned over L.
53

The next step is to observe that this argument can be modiﬁed so as to show that
the image of ˜x∞
∞ in the projective space deﬁned by the diﬀerentials on Xn
L (for n ≥ 1) is
independent of ˜x∞
∞ and deﬁned over L. To see this, we need to introduce some new objects.
First, let us ﬁx n. Now observe that (after possibly enlarging K) there exists a ﬁnite ´etale
covering Zn
K → Spec(K)o f XK with stable reduction Zn → Spec(OK), together with a
ﬁnite Galois extension ˜L of L such that
Xn
˜L = Xn
L ⊗L ˜L ∼= Zn
˜L = Zn
K ⊗K ˜L
Now let m ≥ n, and consider ˜xm ∈ Xm
L (Ltm) ⊆ Xm
L (˜Ltm), where ˜Ltm is the composite
of Ltm and ˜L (as extensions of L). (Note that ˜Ltm is then a maximal tamely ramiﬁed
extension of ˜L.) Thus, by projecting ˜xm to a point of Zn
K, we obtain a morphism
zm : Spec(O˜Ltm ) →Z n
Let us assume that we have chosen K large enough so that Zn
K(K) is nonempty, so that
we can identify JZn
K
(i.e., the Jacobian of Zn
K)w i t hJ(1)
Zn
K
.L e t NZn
K
→ Spec(OK)b et h e
N´eron model of Zn
K over OK. More generally, in the following discussion we shall denote
by N(−) the N´eron model of any proper hyperbolic curve “( −)” over a discretely valued
ﬁeld. In fact, we shall even use this notation for proper hyperbolic curves over inductive
limits of discretely valued ﬁelds in which case this notation is to be taken to mean the
corresponding inductive limit of the N´eron models. Also, we shall denote by
Comp(N
(−))
the (inductive limit of) ﬁnite abelian (´etale) group scheme(s) of connected components of
the special ﬁber of the N´eron model N(−).
The main technical diﬃculty that we must overcome in order to apply the argument
of Section 9 (for XK) to the curves Zn
K is the following: The points that we are interested
in are the points zm of Zn
K(˜Ltm)= Zn(O˜Ltm ). These points deﬁne points of J(1)
Zn
K
∼= JZn
K
,
hence points
zN
m : Spec(O˜Ltm ) →N Zn
˜Ltm
Then, in order to apply the argument of Section 9, we must show that:
(After replacing K by a ﬁnite extension of K which is independent of
m), zN
m maps the special point of Spec( O˜Ltm ) to the same component
of Comp(NZn
˜Ltm
) as some Ktm-valued point of NZn
˜Ltm
.
54

(see Lemma 10.2 below for an alternate formulation.) To show this, we reason as follows:
Let us write ˜Lunr for the maximal unramiﬁed extension of ˜L in ˜Ltm.T h u s ,˜Ltm is a totally
tamely ramiﬁed extension of ˜Lunr.I np a r t i c u l a r ,˜Ltm is a union of ﬁnite Galois extensions
of ˜Lunr which are of degree (over˜Lunr) prime to p. In particular, it follows that thecokernel
of the inclusion
Comp(NZn
˜Lunr
) ↪→ Comp(NZn
˜Ltm
)
is annihilated by integers prime to p. (Indeed, this follows by applying the “trace map”
(for subextensions of ˜Ltm over ˜Lunr) to the second “Comp,” and observing that (since
Gal(˜Ltm/˜Lunr) clearly acts trivially on Comp(NZn
˜Ltm
)) this trace map is just multiplication
by some integer prime to p.) On the other hand, since ˜Lunr is an unramiﬁed extension of
˜L, it follows (essentially from the deﬁnition of the N´eron model) that NZn
˜Lunr
= NZn
˜L
.I n
particular, since ˜L is a discretely valued ﬁeld, it follows that Comp(NZn
˜L
)i s ﬁnite .I n o t h e r
words, we conclude that: the p-torsion of Comp(NZn
˜Ltm
) is annihilated by some (ﬁnite)
power of p. We are now ready to prove the following Lemma:
Lemma 10.2. After possibly enlarging K by a larger ﬁeld that is independent of m,w e
may arrange that the morphism zJ
m : Spec(˜Ltm) → J(1)
Zn
K
∼= JZn
K
induced by zm extends to a
morphism Spec(O˜Ltm ) →N Zn
Ktm , for all m ≥ n.
Proof. Indeed, without enlarging K, it follows from our observation above concerning the
p-torsion of Comp( NZn
˜Ltm
)t h a ta · zJ
m extends to (zN )′
m : Spec(O˜Ltm ) →N Zn
K
for some
positive integer a whose order at the prime p is independent of m. N o wl e tu sa s s u m e
(by enlarging K – independently of m) that all of the p-torsion points of JZn
K
annihilated
by a are rational over K. Since all prime-to- p torsion points of JZn
K
are rational over
Ktm, it thus follows that the morphism “multiplication by a”o n NZn
Ktm is ﬁnite over a
neighborhood of the image of (zN )′
m ⊗OK OKtm in NZn
K
⊗OK OKtm ⊆N ′
Zn
Ktm
.S i n c e(zN )′
m
was constructed by multiplying zJ
m by a, it thus follows that zJ
m extends to a morphism
Spec(O˜Ltm ) →N Zn
Ktm , as desired. ⃝
Now that we have Lemma 10.2, we can use the extended morphism of Lemma 10.2
to construct the analogue of the morphism “ gn” of Section 9 (over some tamely ramiﬁed
extension of K). Then the rest of the argument of Section 9 goes through without diﬃculty.
More precisely:
Let ΓΩ
Zn
def
= H0(Zn,ω Zn/OK ). Let Pn def
= P(ΓΩ
Zn ). (That is, Pn is the projective space
over OK deﬁned by ΓΩ
Zn .) Then there is (by the deﬁnition of ΓΩ
Z
n ) a natural ﬁnite morphism
λn
K : Zn
K → Pn
K.L e tλn
m : Spec(O˜Ltm ) → Pn be the morphism obtained by composing zm
with λn
K. Then, just as in Section 9, one sees viap-adic Hodge theory that asm →∞ (and
55

n remains ﬁxed), the λn
m converge to a point inλn
∞ ∈ Pn( ˆO˜Ltm )= Pn((˜Ltm)∧). Moreover,
λn
∞ is independent of the original sequence {˜xm }. Finally, just as we saw for Lemma 10.1,
by transport of structure and the fact thatα (and, here, Xn
L) are deﬁned over L, it follows
that if we regard λn
∞ as a point of PXn
((˜Ltm)∧), where PXn
is the projective space over
L associated to
H0(Xn
L,ωXn
L/L)
(for the original L), then λn
∞ ∈ PXn
(L). Thus, we see that we obtain the following
analogue of Lemma 10.1:
Lemma 10.3. The image λn
∞ ∈ PXn
(M) of ˜x∞
∞ ∈ X∞
L (M) under the natural morphism
X∞
L → Xn
L → PXn
is independent of ˜x∞
∞ and, moreover, λn
∞ is deﬁned over L.
Now let us recall some basic facts on hyperelliptic curves:
Lemma 10.4. Let Q be a proper hyperbolic curve over an algebraically closed ﬁeldΩ of
characteristic zero. Then:
(1) If Q is hyperelliptic (i.e., admits a “g1
2,” or linear system of dimension
1 and degree 2), then the g1
2 is unique.
(2) If Q is non-hyperelliptic, then the canonical morphism fromQ into the
projective space associated toH0(Q,ωQ/Ω) is an embedding.
(3) Suppose that W → Q is a ﬁnite ´etale covering, where W is connected.
Then if Q is non-hyperelliptic, so is W.
(4) Suppose that W → Q (where W is connected) is a cyclic ´etale covering
of degree m> 2.T h e nW is non-hyperelliptic.
Thus, in particular, none of the Xn
L is hyperelliptic, for n ≥ 2.
Proof. For proofs of assertions (1) and (2), we refer to [Harts], Chapter IV, §5, Propo-
sitions 5.2 and 5.3. As for (3), the push-forward of a g1
2 on W via W → Q is a g1
2 on Q,
so (3) follows immediately. Now let us consider assertion (4). Let σ be a generator of the
Galois group of W over Q.I f W admits a g1
2, it is unique, hence stabilized by σ.B u t
this means that there exists some rational function fW on W in this g1
2 which satisﬁes
σ−1(fW )= T(fW ), where T is some linear fractional transformation with coeﬃcients in
Ω. Note that since σ has ﬁnite order, so does T. Thus, if we diagonalize T (by choosing
a diﬀerent fW ), we may assume that σ−1(fW )= λ · fW , for some nonzero λ ∈ Ω. (Note
that T cannot be parabolic (i.e., a transformation of the form fW ↦→ fW + λ,f o rs o m e
nonzero λ ∈ Ω) since T is of ﬁnite order and Ω is of characteristic zero.) Thus, fm
W (which
56

is a constant multiple of the norm (relative to W → Q)o f fW ) deﬁnes a rational function
fQ on Q.N o w fQ is contained in some g1
2 on Q, so its zeroes have order equal to 1 or 2.
On the other hand, fQ has an mth root in the function ﬁeld of W, so it follows from the
assumption that m> 2 that the covering W → Q must be ramiﬁed at the zeroes of fQ,
which is absurd. This contradiction completes the proof. ⃝
We summarize our eﬀorts in Sections 9 and 10 as follows:
Corollary 10.5. Let M be thep-adic completion of a maximal tamely ramiﬁed extension
Ltm of L. Suppose that we are given a nondegenerate α :Γ L → ΠXK , which thus gives
rise to Xn
L, X∞
L . Suppose that for each n ≥ 0, Xn
L(Ltm) is nonempty. Then it follows that
the set X∞
L (M) consists of precisely one point, which is, in fact, contained in X∞
L (L) ⊆
X∞
L (M).
In particular, there exists a unique L-valued point of Spec(L) → XK whose induced
morphism on fundamental groups (for an appropriate choice of base-points) is the mor-
phism α :Γ
L → ΠXK .
Proof. Indeed, if ˜x∞
∞ ∈ X∞
L (M), then by Lemma 10.4, if n ≥ 2, the image of ˜x∞
∞ in
Xn
L(M) is determined by the image λn
∞ of ˜x∞
∞ in PXn
(M). But, by Lemma 10.3, λn
∞ is
independent of ˜x∞
∞ and deﬁned over L. Thus, it follows that the image of ˜x∞
∞ in Xn
L(M)
(for n ≥ 2) is independent of ˜x∞
∞ and deﬁned over L. But, by the deﬁnition of X∞
L ,t h i s
means that ˜x∞
∞ itself is “independent of ˜x∞
∞ ” and deﬁned overL. (In other words, X∞
L (M)
consists of precisely one point, which is, in fact, deﬁned over L.) The last sentence is a
formal consequence of the rest of the Corollary. This completes the proof. ⃝
Section 11: Hodge-Tate Representations of Inﬁnite Rank
Let K be a ﬁnite extension of Qp.L e tXK → Spec(K) be a proper hyperbolic curve
over K.L e t UK be its generic point. Let HU be the abelianization of Δ U .T h u s ,HU is
a Zp-ﬂat topological Γ K-module of inﬁnite rank. Note that we have a natural surjection
HU → HX → HI
X (cf. the discussion following Deﬁnition 6.3 for the deﬁnition of HI
X).
Let HM
U ⊆ HU be the kernel of this surjection. Note that the inertia groups (deﬁned by
closed points of XK)o fΔ U all map into HM
U .L e t HP
U ⊆ HM
U denote the closure of the
image of all these inertia groups. (Here the “ P” stands for “points.”) Thus, HU /HP
U may
be identiﬁed with HX , hence is of ﬁnite rank over Zp. In this Section, we would like to
analyze HU , and, in particular, HP
U in greater detail.
For simplicity, let us assume (by replacing K by a ﬁnite extension of K) that XK
has stable reduction over OK, and that there exists a K-valued point x ∈ XK(K). Let
℘ ∈ XK be a closed point of XK. Then there are ﬁnitely many points y1,...,y r ∈
57

XK(
K) = Hom(Spec(
K),XK)t h a tm a pt o℘.F o ri =1 ,...,r ,l e tIyi ⊆ Δ U denote “the”
inertia group (well-deﬁned up to conjugation by an element of ΔU ) associated to yi.T h u s ,
projection to the quotient Δ U → HU yields a map
I℘
def
=
r⨁
i=1
Iyi → HP
U
Note, moreover, that I℘ has a natural structure of Γ K-module (given, for instance, by
conjugating by the image of a section Γ K → ΠUK (cf. Deﬁnition 5.1) induced by x ∈
XK(K) – note, however, that the Γ K-action is independent of the choice of x). Relative
to this ΓK-action on I℘, the above morphism is Γ K-equivariant. Moreover, by letting ℘
range over all closed points of XK other than that deﬁned by x, we obtain a continuous
ΓK-equivariant morphism
Ξ: Mx
def
=
∏
℘̸=x
I℘ → HP
U
In fact,
Lemma 11.1. The morphism Ξ is an isomorphism.
Proof. Note that ΠUK is equal to the inverse limit of ΠVK , where the limit is taken over
all open subsets VK ⊆ XK −{ x}. For such a VK, we can deﬁne HP
V just as we deﬁned HP
U ,
and it is well-known that HP
V is the direct sum of the I℘, where the sum is taken over all
℘ ∈ XK −{ x}− VK – indeed, this follows from the well-known (from elementary algebraic
topology) structure of the homology group of a Riemann surface obtained by removing a
ﬁnite number of points from a compact Riemann surface. Passing to the limit proves the
Lemma. ⃝
Next, we would like to deﬁne a quotient I
℘ → IT
℘ as follows: Note that if K℘ is the
residue ﬁeld of XK at ℘, then the ΓK-module I℘(−1) (where the “( −1)” is a Tate twist)
may be naturally identiﬁed with Zp[HomK(K℘,
K)]. (Here, Zp[a set] denotes the free Zp-
module generated by the elements of the set.) Thus, there exists a unique nonzero quotient
I℘(−1) → Q℘ stabilized by ΓK such that ΓK acts trivially on Q℘.M o r e o v e r ,Q℘ is a free
Zp-module of rank one. Let I℘ → IT
℘ be the quotient obtained by tensoring I℘(−1) → Q℘
with Zp(1). Moreover, by taking the product of these quotients, we obtain a quotient
Mx → MT
x
def
=
∏
℘̸=x
IT
℘
Let HP
U → HT
U be the quotient corresponding to this quotient under the isomorphism
Ξ. Thus, the Γ K-action on HT
U (−1) is trivial.M o r e o v e r ,HP
U → HT
U has the following
universal property:
58

Lemma 11.2. Let N be a Zp-ﬂat topological ΓK-module such that ΓK acts trivially on
N(−1). Then any continuous ΓK-morphism HP
U → N factors through HT
U .
Proof. This follows immediately from the construction of HT
U . ⃝
Now let us deﬁne the subquotientHT
X of HU as follows: First, letHF
U ⊆ HU denote the
inverse image of HF
X ⊆ HX under the projection HU → HX (cf. the discussion following
Deﬁnition 6.3 for the deﬁnition of HF
X ). Now let HT
X be the quotient of HF
U by the kernel
of HP
U → HT
U . Thus, we have an exact sequence of topological ΓK-modules
0 → HT
U → HT
X → HF
X → 0
Let us take the continuous dual Hom cont
Zp (−, Zp) of this exact sequence. This gives us a
new exact sequence of topological ΓK-modules
0 → CF
X → CT
X → CT
U → 0
(Here, one may think of the “H’s” as standing for “homology,” and the “C’s” as standing
for “cohomology.”) In particular, we have
CT
U =
(⨁
℘̸=x
ZT
℘
)∧
where ZT
℘ is deﬁned to be the dual of IT
℘ . If we pull-back this last exact sequence by
ZT
℘ ⊆ CT
U , we obtain exact sequences of topological ΓK-modules
0 → CF
X → CT
℘ → ZT
℘ → 0
all of which are of ﬁnite rank over Zp. Moreover, it is clear that that CT
X is obtained by
summing these extensions (over ℘)a n dt h e np-adically completing.
We would like to show thatCT
X is “Hodge-Tate”. Unfortunately, typically the theory
of Hodge-Tate Galois representations only goes through for modules of ﬁnite rank overZp.
On the other hand, CT
℘ is of ﬁnite rank over Zp. Thus, our approach in the following will
be to use the CT
℘ to show that CT
X is, in some sense, like a Hodge-Tate representation.
First, let X℘ be the singular curve obtained from XK by considering the subsheaf of
OXK of functions f such that f(x)= f(℘). Let J ′
℘ be the generalized Jacobianassociated
to X℘ (see, e.g., [Ser1], Chapitre I, §1). Thus, J ′
℘ is an extension of the abelian varietyJX
by some torus. Moreover, the p-adic Tate module T(J′
℘)o f J ′
℘ ﬁts into an exact sequence
of ΓK-modules
59

0 → I℘ → T(J ′
℘) → HX → 0
In particular, one sees immediately that there exists a quotientJ ′
℘ → J℘ whose p-adic Tate
module ﬁts into the exact sequence
0 → IT
℘ → Tp(J℘) → HX → 0
obtained by pushing forward the preceding exact sequence by I℘ → IT
℘ .M o r e o v e r ,CT
℘
may be identiﬁed with the dual of the pull-back of this exact sequence by HF
X ↪→ HX.
Alternatively, CT
℘ may be identiﬁed with a certain quotient Tp(J℘)∨ = H1(J℘, Zp) → CT
℘
(whose kernel is the dual of HX/HF
X). Note, in particular, that J℘ is an extension of JX
by the trivial torus Gm.T h u s ,J℘ extends to a semi-abelian variety over OK (cf. the
paragraph following Theorem 2.6 of Chapter I of [FC]).
Next, let us recall (from the theory of [FC], Chapters I through III) that JX may
be constructed as a certain rigid analytic quotient of a semi-abelian variety ˜JX which has
good reduction (i.e., the dimension of the torus part is constant) overOK by some discrete
group. The kernel of the induced pull-back map on cohomologyH1(JX, Zp) → H1( ˜JX, Zp)
is precisely the dual of HX/HF
X. If we pull-back the extension J℘ → JX from JX to ˜JX,
we then obtain an extension ˜J℘ of ˜JX by the trivial torus of dimension one. Moreover, ˜J℘
has good reduction over OK. Finally, the quotient H1(J℘, Zp) → H1( ˜J℘, Zp) is precisely
the quotient H1(J℘, Zp) → CT
℘ referred to in the preceding paragraph.
Now, just as in Section 9, we can apply the theory of [Falt1] (in the case of good
reduction)t o ˜J℘.L e t F0
def
= H1(X, OX), where X → Spec(OK) is the stable extension of
XK over OK.L e tF℘ be the space of invariant diﬀerentials on ˜J℘,w h e r e˜J℘ → Spec(OK)
is the extension of ˜J℘ to a semi-abelian variety over OK.T h u s ,F0 and F℘ are both free
of ﬁnite rank over OK. Then it follows from the theory of [Falt1] (speciﬁcally, Theorems
2.4 and 3.1 of II. of [Falt1]) that
(∗)℘ There exists a natural ΓK-equivariant, ˆO
K-linear morphism
CT
℘ ⊗Zp
ˆO
K → (F0 ⊗OK
ˆO
K) ⊕ (F℘ ⊗OK
ˆO
K(−1))
which has an inverse up to pn,w h e r en is a nonnegative integer that is
independent of ℘.
Note that the fact that n is independent of ℘ is of profound importance in what follows.
Moreover, if, instead of ˜J℘,w eh a dw o r k e dw i t hJ℘ (which, in general, has “bad (though
stable) reduction”), or J ′
℘ (which has only potentially stable reduction – i.e., for general
℘, one needs to enlarge K in order to get stable reduction), we would have been unable to
obtain this crucial “independence of ℘” from the theory of [Falt1].
60

Now observe that F℘ ﬁts into a natural exact sequence
0 →F F
X →F ℘ →Z ℘ → 0
where FF
X
def
= H0(X,ωX/OK ), and Z℘ is deﬁned so as to make the above sequence exact.
Now let FT
X be the sum of these extensions over all ℘;l e tFT
U be the direct sum of the Z℘
over all ℘. Thus, we have an exact sequence of ﬂat OK-modules
0 →F F
X →F T
X →F T
U → 0
Thus, by taking the p-adic completion of the sum of the morphisms in (∗)℘, and using the
facts that:
(i) the “ n”o f( ∗)℘ is independent of ℘;
(ii) both CT
X and FT
X are sums of extensions which are of ﬁnite rank;
we obtain the following result:
Proposition 11.3. We have a natural, ˆO
K-linear morphism of exact sequences of
topological ΓK-modules
0 −→ CF
X ˆ⊗Zp
ˆO
K −→ CT
X ˆ⊗Zp
ˆO
K⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
0 −→ (F
F
X ˆ⊗OK
ˆO
K(−1)) ⊕ (F0 ˆ⊗OK
ˆO
K) −→ (FT
X ˆ⊗OK
ˆO
K(−1)) ⊕ (F0 ˆ⊗OK
ˆO
K)
−→ CT
U ˆ⊗Zp
ˆO
K −→ 0
⏐⏐↓
−→ (FT
U ˆ⊗OK
ˆO
K(−1)) −→ 0
which become isomorphisms when tensored with Qp.
Next, we would like to relate FT
X to a certain space of diﬀerentials on X, as follows:
Let E be a ﬁnite set of closed points of XK.L e t S
def
= Spec( O
K), and let us endow S
with the log structure deﬁned by the monoid OS −{ 0}; denote the resulting log scheme
by Slog.L e t Xlog[E] → Slog be the pointed stable log-curve (see, e.g., [Mzk3], Section 3,
for more details on this terminology) extending XK ⊗K
 K, equipped with all the points
61

of XK(
K) that map to primes in E as marked points. Let L[E]
def
= ωXlog[E]/Slog .T h e ni f
E ⊆ E′, we get a natural morphism Xlog[E′] → Xlog[E], which lies under a morphism of
sheaves L[E] →L [E′]. Thus, by taking the projective limit of the ( Xlog[E], L[E]) as E
ranges over all ﬁnite sets of closed points of XK,w eo b t a i n(Xlog[∞ ], L[∞ ]). Moreover,
note that H0(X[∞ ], L[∞ ]) is a ﬂat, p-adically separated O
K-module.
If E contains x and ℘, then it is easy to see that we get a natural inclusion F℘ ↪→
H0(X[E], L[E]), which extends to a morphism F℘ ⊗OK O
K ↪→ H0(X[E], L[E]) whose
cokernel is torsion free. Taking the limit with respect toE, we thus obtain a mapF℘ ⊗OK
O
K ↪→ H0(X[∞ ], L[∞ ]). In fact, it is not diﬃcult to see that, by summing over the F℘
for all ℘ ̸= x, we get a morphism
FT
X ⊗OK O
K ↪→F ∞
def
= H0(X[∞ ], L[∞ ])
whose cokernel is torsion free. Moreover, this morphism remains injective after p-adic
completion. Thus, we see from Proposition 11.3 that we get a morphism
Φ: CT
X ˆ⊗Zp
ˆO
K →F ∧
∞ (−1)
(where the “ ∧” denotes p-adic completion). Moreover, the kernel of Φ is of weight zero.
Finally, ifN is a positive integer, letG∞ [N]
def
= H0(X[∞ ], L[∞ ]⊗N ). Thus, G∞ [N]i saf r e e
O
K-module of inﬁnite rank (such that G∞ [1] = F∞ ), and we have a natural multiplication
morphism
⊗N
O
K
F∞ →G ∞ [N]
Section 12: The Preservation of Relations
The purpose of this Section is to show how the material of Section 11 will be applied
in Section 13 to show the “preservation of relations.” We maintain the notation of Section
11. Moreover, let us assume that we have been given a continuous open homomorphism
over ΓK
θ:Π UK → ΠYK
(where YK → Spec(K) is a proper hyperbolic curve overK). For simplicity, let us assume
(by enlarging K)t h a tYK extends to a stable curve Y → Spec(OK) over OK,a n dt h a t
the ΓK-action on HM
Y (−1) (cf. the discussion following Deﬁnition 6.3 for an explanation
of the notation “ HM ”) is trivial. Next, observe that θ induces a continuous morphism
of ΓK-modules HU → HY whose cokernel is torsion. Note that this morphism induces
62

am a p HF
U → HF
Y (cf. the discussions following Deﬁnition 6.3 and Lemma 11.2 for an
explanation of the notation “ HF ”) whose cokernel is torsion. Moreover, the restriction of
this morphism to HP
U (cf. the discussion at the beginning of Section 11 for an explanation
of the notation “ HP
U ”) maps into HM
Y , hence (by Lemma 11.2 and the fact that Γ K acts
trivially on HM
Y (−1)), we get a morphism HT
X → HF
Y whose cokernel is torsion. Taking
the dual of this morphism yields an injection CF
Y ↪→ CT
X (where CF
Y is the dual of HF
Y ).
Topologically tensoring with O
K, dividing out by the “weight zero part,” and applying the
morphism Φ considered at the end of Section 11, we thus obtain (after further tensoring
with Z
p(1)) an injection
H0(Y,ω Y/ OK ) ⊗OK
ˆO
K ↪→F ∧
∞
In this Section, we shall be concerned with the issue of whether or not this morphism
“preserves relations.” By this, we mean the following: Let N be a positive integer. By
taking the Nth tensor power of this morphism, and then composing with the completion
of the multiplication morphism ⊗N F∞ →G ∞ [N] considered at the end of Section 11, we
obtain a morphism
ΨN : ⊗N (H0(Y,ω Y/ OK ) ⊗OK
ˆO
K) → (G∞ [N])∧
We would like to know whether or not ΨN annihilates the elements of
RN
def
=K e r (⊗N (H0(Y,ω Y/ OK )) → H0(Y,ω ⊗N
Y/ OK
))
i.e., the “relations.” In the following, we would like to state a certain assertion that will
be proven in the next Section, and explain why this assertion implies that ΨN “preserves
relations.”
First, let us introduce the notation necessary to state the assertion. Suppose that E
is a ﬁnite set of points of XK(K). Then the pointed stable curve Xlog[E] → Spec(O
K)
introduced at the end of Section 11 is deﬁned overK, i.e., we haveXlog[E]OK → Spec(OK).
Let p ∈ X[E]OK be a generic point of the special ﬁber of X[E]OK . Let Spf( OL)b et h e
completion of the localization ofX[E]OK at p.T h u s ,L (the quotient ﬁeld of OL)i sa p-adic
ﬁeld whose residue ﬁeld is k(p) (i.e., the residue ﬁeld of X[E]OK at the prime p), and we
have a canonical L-valued point ξL ∈ XK(L). Let Ω L/K denote the module of p-adically
continuous diﬀerentials of L over K.T h u s , ΩL/K is an L-vector space of dimension one.
Moreover, note that we have a natural restriction morphism (induced byξL)
F ∧
∞ → ΩL/K ˆ⊗K
ˆ
K
Thus, if we compose this morphism with the morphism
H0(Y,ω Y/ OK ) ⊗OK
ˆO
K ↪→F ∧
∞
63

considered above, we get a morphism
κL : H0(Y,ω Y/ OK ) ⊗OK
ˆO
K → ΩL/K ˆ⊗K
ˆ
K
Next, let us observe that the coverings of XK deﬁned by subgroups of Π UK are ´etale
at the point ξL. Thus, it follows that ξL induces a natural morphism αL
U :Γ L → ΠUK
(well-deﬁned up to conjugation by an element of Δ U ) whose composite with Π UK → ΓK
is the natural morphism ΓL → ΓK.L e t αL
Y :Γ L → ΠYK be the composite of αL
U with θ.
Then the assertion that will be proven in Section 13 is the following:
(∗)L−pt Suppose that p satisﬁes the condition that κL is not identically
zero. Then it follows that there exists a point ( ξ′)L ∈ YK(L) such that
αL
Y arises from (ξ′)L.
Note in particular, that ifαL
Y arises from (ξ′)L, then it follows immediately that the group-
theoretically constructed morphismκL coincides (cf. the application of the theory of [Falt1]
discussed in Section 9) with the natural restriction map on diﬀerentials induced by (ξ′)L.
Thus, if ρ ∈R N is a relation, then it follows that the restriction of ΨN(ρ) ∈ (G∞ [N])∧ to
Ω⊗N
L/K ˆ⊗K
ˆ
K is zero. This argument already leads one to believe that there should be some
sort of connection between ( ∗)L−pt and the “preservation of relations.” In fact, we have
the following:
Proposition 12.1. Suppose that (∗)L−pt always holds (i.e., for all data of the sort
discussed above). Then ΨN(RN )=0 , for all positive integers N.
Proof. Suppose that ρ ∈R N is such that ψ′ def
=Ψ N (ρ) ̸= 0. By dividing ψ′ by a suitable
element of O
K,w eo b t a i na ne l e m e n tψ ∈ (G∞ [N])∧ such that ψ ̸≡ 0( mod m
K)( w h e r e
m
K ⊆O
 K is the maximal ideal). Let us write
 k for the residue ﬁeld O
K/m
K.W r i t e
ψ for
ψ considered modulo m
K.T h e n
ψ is a section of L[E]⊗N ⊗
 k for some E. By enlarging
K, we may assume that E consists solely of K-valued points of XK. Moreover, since
 ψ is
nonzero, there exists some irreducible component of the special ﬁber ofX[E]⊗
k over which
ψ is nonzero. If we choose p (in the above discussion) to be such that p ⊗OK O
K is this
irreducible component, then it follows that the restriction ofψ ∈ (G∞ [N])∧ to Ω⊗N
L/K ˆ⊗K
ˆ
K
will be nonzero.N o wI claim that p satisﬁes the condition that κL is not identically zero:
Indeed, if κL were identically zero, then it would follow that κ⊗N
L would be identically
zero. But the restriction of ψ to Ω⊗N
L/K ˆ⊗K
ˆ
K (which is assumed to be nonzero) is a nonzero
K-multiple of κ⊗N
L (ρ) (which would have to be zero). This contradiction proves the claim.
Thus, we are in a position to apply (∗)L−pt. As discussed in the paragraph preceding
this Proposition, it then follows that the restriction of ψ to Ω⊗N
L/K ˆ⊗K
ˆ
K is zero. Thus, we
get a contradiction. This completes the proof of the Proposition. ⃝
64

Remark. In [Mzk2], where one only considers isomorphisms of π1’s, as opposed to homo-
morphisms as we do here, there is no need to place (as we did in ( ∗)L−pt) the condition
on p that κL be not identically zero. Because in the present context it is necessary to
include such a condition on p in (∗)L−pt, the author at ﬁrst did not see how it would be
possible to prove the “preservation of relations” in the present context. However, in fact,
in order to prove the preservation of relations (Proposition 12.1), it suﬃces to consider
only p for which one knows already that κ
L is not identically zero. This observation arose
in discussions between the author and A. Tamagawa.
Section 13: The Preservation of L-Points
The purpose of this Section is to verify the assertion ( ∗)L−pt discussed in Section
12. The technique is similar to that employed in [Mzk2] (although we do not assume any
knowledge of [Mzk2] in the following discussion). We continue with the notation of the
preceding Section. In particular, we assume that we have been given a continuous open
homomorphism over Γ
K
θ:Π UK → ΠYK
Moreover, we assume that XK extends to a stable curve X → Spec(OK). Let p be as in
(∗)L−pt. Thus, we have a blow-up ˜X → X (that is, ˜X is what we denoted by X[E]OK
in Section 12), and p is a generic point of the special ﬁber of ˜X → Spec(OK). Choose a
smooth, aﬃne, geometrically connected open neighborhood W of p in the special ﬁber of
˜X.L e tT be the aﬃne scheme whose coordinate ring RT is such that Spf(RT )( w h e r ew e
equip RT with the p-adic topology) is the completion of ˜X along W.T h u s ,T → Spec(OK)
is (p-adically) formally smooth, and T ⊗ k = W. By abuse of notation, we shall write p for
the prime of T that maps to the original p under T → ˜X.L e tu sw r i t eηT for the generic
point of T (regarded as a scheme). Let L be the quotient ﬁeld of the p-adic completion of
(RT )p.T h u s ,L is a p-adic ﬁeld whose residue ﬁeld is k(W) (the function ﬁeld of W).
Note that we have natural morphisms ξT
X : T → X; ξηT
X : ηT → XK; ξL
X : Spec(L) →
XK; ξηT
U : ηT → UK; ξL
U : Spec(L) → UK.L e t αηT
U :Γ ηT → ΠUK be the morphism
determined (up to conjugation by an element of Δ U )b y ξηT
U . Similarly, we have αL
U :
ΓL → ΠUK .C o m p o s i n gαηT
U , αL
U with θ gives αηT
Y :Γ ηT → ΠYK , αL
Y :Γ L → ΠYK .
Now let ΔY ′ ⊆ Δ Y be a p-derivate (see Deﬁnition 0.2) of Δ Y .T h u s ,ΔY ′ is an open,
characteristic subgroup of Δ Y . Note that αηT
Y deﬁnes a section aηT
Y :Γ ηT → ΠYηT
of
ΠYηT
→ ΓηT .W r i t eΠY ′
ηT
for the open subgroup Im(aηT
Y ) · Δ Y ′ ⊆ ΠYηT
.T h u s ,ΠY ′
ηT
gives
rise to a ﬁnite ´etale covering
Y ′
ηT → YηT
65

Moreover, there exists some ﬁnite ´etale covering ηT ′ → ηT such that
Y ′
ηT ×ηT ηT ′ ∼= ZY
K′ ×K′ ηT ′
for some curve ZY
K′ → Spec(K′), where K′ is a ﬁnite extension of K contained in K(ηT ′ ).
Let T ′ be the normalization ofT in ηT ′.T h e nT ′ → T is ﬁnite (since ηT is of characteristic
zero) and generically ´etale.
By means of θ, we can pull-back the above covering to UηT : Thus, we obtain an
open subgroup ΠU ′
ηT
⊆ ΠUηT
, which corresponds to some ﬁnite ´etale covering U′
ηT → UηT
(which is geometrically connected overηT since ΠU ′
ηT
contains the graph ofαηT
U in ΠUηT
=
ΓηT ×ΓK ΠUK ). This covering extends to a ﬁnite, possibly ramiﬁed covering X′
ηT → XηT .
Moreover, we have an isomorphism
X′
ηT ×ηT ηT ′ ∼= ZX
K′ ×K′ ηT ′
for some curve ZX
K′ → Spec(K′). By enlarging K′, we may assume that this curve has a
stable extension ZX → Spec(OK′ ).
Next, let us go back to considering the morphism ξηT
U : ηT → UK. Now it follows
tautologically from the way we deﬁnedαηT
Y (i.e., the fact that it comes originally fromξηT
U )
that ξηT
U lifts naturally to a point ξηT
U ′ : ηT → U′
ηT .L e t ξηT
X′ : ηT → X′
ηT be the result of
composing this morphism withU′
ηT → X′
ηT . Moreover, by restricting toηT ′,w eg e tap o i n t
ξηT ′
X′ : ηT ′ → X′
ηT ′ . Projecting to ZX
K′ , we thus get a point ξηT ′
ZX : ηT ′ → ZX
K′ .M o r e o v e r ,i t
is easy to see that this morphism extends to a morphism ξT ′′
ZX : T ′′ → ZX,w h e r eT ′′ ⊆ T ′
is an open subscheme obtained as the “ D(f)” (i.e., the complement of V (f) ⊆ T ′)f o r
some f ∈ Γ(T ′, OT ′ ) with the property that f is nonzero at every generic point of the
special ﬁber of T ′ → Spec(OK′ ). Indeed, this follows from the following two facts: (i) we
already have an extension to T ′
K′ ,s i n c eZX
K′ → XK is ﬁnite ,a n dξηT
X : ηT → XK extends
to TK; (ii) to extend from T ′
K′ to some T ′′, it suﬃces to apply the valuative criterion for
properness (since ZX → Spec(OK′ ) is proper).
Next, let us consider the morphism T ′′ ⊆ T ′ → T. Clearly (after possibly enlarging
K′) there exists a closed pointt ∈ T such that if we letS be the completion of T at t,t h e n
the morphism S′′ → S obtained by base-changing T ′′ → T by S → T has the following
properties: (i) S′′ → S is ﬁnite and ﬂat; (ii) S′′ is a ﬁnite disjoint sum of connected
components which are geometrically irreducible over OK′ ; (iii) each of these components
admits a section over OK′ .L e t S′ be any one of these connected components. Then we
have the following:
Lemma 13.1. The scheme S′ is normal.
Proof. (Note that this is not entirely obvious since it is not clear thatT is excellent.) First,
I claim that the (ﬂat) morphism S → T is geometrically regular. Indeed, over the generic
66

ﬁber, this follows from the fact that S is regular and generically of characteristic zero;
over a closed point of TK or T, either the ﬁber of the morphism S → T is (schematically)
isomorphic to the given closed point, or it is empty. Thus, it remains to check what happens
over the height one prime of T which is the special ﬁber of T → Spec(OK). But over this
prime, the geometric regularity ofS → T follows from the excellence ofT ⊗ k = W (which
is ﬁnitely generated over a ﬁnite ﬁeld). This completes the proof of the claim. Thus, it
follows that S′ → T ′ is geometrically regular. Moreover, T ′ is normal; hence, we obtain
that S′ is normal, as desired. ⃝
Thus, S′ → S satisﬁes the properties listed in Deﬁnition 6.3. Moreover, if we apply the
base-change S → T to all the objects in the above discussion, it is easy to see that we are
in the situation discussed in Proposition 7.4. Note, in particular, that the existence of the
morphism ξ
T ′′
ZX : T ′′ → ZX shows that the condition ( ∗)S′
(cf. the discussion preceding
Deﬁnition 6.4) is satisﬁed by αηS
X′ :Γ ηS → ΠX′
ηS
. In fact, we also have the following:
Lemma 13.2. αηS
X′ is F-geometric,h e n c ea l s oFI -geometric.
Proof. Indeed, ﬁrst observe that restricting ξT ′′
ZX gives rise to a morphism ξ1 : S′ → ZX.
Since S′ was constructed so as to admit a section over OK′ ,l e t σ : Spec( OK′ ) → S′
be such a section. Then we may form the composite ξσ : S′ → ZX of the structure
morphism S′ → Spec(OK′ )w i t hξ1 ◦σ. Now observe that ξ1 and ξσ both deﬁne sections
of ZX
S′
def
= ZX ×OK′ S′ → S′ (which coincide over Im(σ)). Let D1,Dσ ⊆ ZX
S′ be the Weil
divisors which are the images of these two sections. Next, let us observe that by Lemma
13.3 below, these two Weil divisors are Q-Cartier. Hence it follows that there exists a
positive integer N such that N · D
1 and N · Dσ are, in fact, Cartier divisors,s ow em a y
form the line bundleL
def
= OZX
S′
(N ·D1 − N ·Dσ). Note that the line bundle L is trivial over
Im(σ) ⊆ S′, hence over the closed point ofS′.L e tJZX → Spec(OK′ ) be the unique semi-
abelian scheme whose generic ﬁber is the Jacobian of ZX
K′ . Then it follows that L deﬁnes
an S′-valued point of JZX which arises from an S′-valued point of the formal completion
of JZX at the identity. But, sorting through the deﬁnitions (in particular, Deﬁnitions 6.2,
6.4) reveals that this implies that αηS
X′ is F-geometric, hence also FI -geometric (cf. the
paragraph following Deﬁntion 6.4). ⃝
Lemma 13.3. The scheme ZX
S′
def
= ZX ×OK′ S′ is normal, and, moreover, any Weil
divisor D ⊆ ZX
S′ arising as the graph of an OK′ -morphism ξD : S′ → ZX is Q-Cartier.
Proof. By Lemma 13.1 above, S′ is normal. Moreover, since ZX
S′ is a generically smooth
stable curve overS′, one checks easily that the conditions “R1”a n d“S2” of Serre (see, e.g.,
[Mats], Chapter 7, §17.I, Theorem 39) are satisﬁed by ZX
S′ ,s o ZX
S′ is normal. Now recall
that to say that a Weil divisor is “Q-Cartier” simply means that some nonzero multiple of
that Weil divisor is Cartier. Next, let us observe that since the graph ofξD is deﬁned by a
67

single equation in a neighborhood of any point of the smooth locus ofZX → Spec(OK′ ), it
suﬃces to check that D is Q-Cartier in a neighborhood of the nodes of the special ﬁber of
ZX → Spec(OK′ ). In fact, it even suﬃces to check that D is Q-Cartier over the spectrum
of the completion of the local ring of ZX
S′ at such a node.
Thus, let us write
A
def
=Γ (S′, OS′ ); B
def
= OK′ [[x, y]]/(xy − πn); C
def
= A[[x, y]]/(xy − πn)
where π ∈O K′ is a uniformizer, and n is a positive integer. Here, we think of B (respec-
tively, C) as the result of completing ZX (respectively, ZX
S′ ) at a node (respectively, at
the inverse image of this node via the projection ZX
S′ → ZX). Recall that S′ is aﬃne, so
S′ = Spec(A). Now ξD is given by some morphismB→A .W r i t esx,sy ∈A for the images
of x and y, respectively, under this morphism. Note that sx · sy = πn ∈A . Moreover, the
restriction DC of the subscheme D to Spec(C) is deﬁned by the equations x − sx,y − sy,
i.e., DC = V (x − sx,y − sy). Now let us consider the regular function x − sx on Spec(C).
I claim that the ideals ( x − sx)a n d(x − sx,y − sy)i n C coincide in C[1
π ]. Indeed, this
follows from the following equation:
y − sy = −y · sy
πn (x − sx) ∈C [1
π]
Thus, we conclude that on Spec( C), the Weil divisor DC is linearly equivalent to a Weil
divisor E on Spec(C) which is supported on the special ﬁber FC of Spec(C) → Spec(OK′ ).
On the other hand, the fact thatS′ → Spec(OK′ ) is geometrically irreducible implies that
(FC)red has precisely two irreducible components, namely, V (x)red and V (y)red.T h u s , i t
follows that any divisor supported onFC is Q-Cartier, as desired. This completes the proof
of the Lemma. ⃝
Thus, (by Lemma 13.2) we may apply Proposition 7.4 to conclude that Y ′
ηS admits a
line bundle of degree prime to p. Moreover, by Proposition 8.1 and Lemma 8.2, it thus
follows that:
Y ′
L
def
= Y ′
ηT ×ηT Spec(L) has a rational point over some tamely ramiﬁed
extension L′ of L.
It is this key result that will allow us to conclude the proof of (∗)L−pt.
Let us review what we have done so far, from the point of view of objects over YL.
First, we have a section aL
Y :Γ L → ΠYL of ΠYL → ΓL (deﬁned by αL
Y ). Moreover, given
any p-derivate ΔY ′
L
⊆ Δ Y , we obtain a ﬁnite ´etale covering Y ′
L → YL deﬁned by Π Y ′
L
def
=
Im(aL
Y ) · Δ Y ′
L
⊆ ΠYL . Under these circumstances, we just showed that Y ′
L necessarily has
68

a rational point over some tamely ramiﬁed extension of L. Moreover, tracing through the
deﬁnitions, it is easy to see that the assumption placed on p in (∗)L−pt that κL be not
identically zero means precisely (in the language introduced at the beginning of Section
9) that aL
Y is nondegenerate. It thus follows that we can apply Corollary 10.5 to conclude
that:
aL
Y :Γ L → ΠYL arises from some geometric point (ξ′)L ∈ YL(L).
In other words, the proof of ( ∗)L−pt has been completed. Thus, by Proposition 12.1, we
conclude the following:
Corollary 13.4. Let θ :Π UK → ΠYK be a continuous open homomorphism over ΓK.
Then θ “preserves relations,” i.e., (in the notation of Section 12), we haveΨN (RN )=0 ,
for all positive integers N.
Note that in [Mzk2] (where we essentially dealt with the case where θ is an isomor-
phism), the preservation of relations is already enough to conclude the proof of the main
theorem. In the present context, however, because of the fact that HU is of inﬁnite rank,
it is necessary to go through one more intermediate technical step before we can complete
the proof of the (ﬁrst part of the) ﬁrst main theorem. This step essentially amounts to
showing that any θ as in Corollary 13.4 necessarily factors through Π
XK . The proof of
this next step is the main topic of the following Section. Note that if this fact (i.e., that θ
factors through ΠXK ) could be proven more directly, then this paper could be simpliﬁed con-
siderably. (For instance, Section 11, as well as the rather technical notions of “irreducibly
splittable” and “FI -geometric” would be unnecessary.) Unfortunately, however, the proof
of this fact in Section 14 relies heavily on the “preservation of relations” (Corollary 13.4).
Section 14: The Annihilation of Inertia
In this Section, we prove that any continuous surjective homomorphism θ :Π UK →
ΠYK over ΓK necessarily (acts as though it) factors through ΠXK . In the process of doing
this, we complete the proof of the (ﬁrst part of) the ﬁrst main theorem of this paper, in the
case where the base ﬁeld is a local ﬁeld. Throughout most of this Section (except for the
very end – i.e., from the statement of Theorem 14.1 on), we continue to use the notation of
the preceding three Sections. Let us assume, moreover, thatY
K is not hyperelliptic.T h u s ,
it follows (e.g., from Lemma 10.4 (3)) that any connected ﬁnite ´etale covering ofYK is also
non-hyperelliptic.
Let us ﬁrst consider the morphism
H0(Y,ω Y/ OK ) ⊗OK
ˆO
K ↪→F ∧
∞
69

constructed in Section 12. We would like to show ﬁrst of all that
(∗)FF
X This morphism factors through FF
X ⊗OK
ˆO
K ⊆F ∧
∞ ,w h e r eFF
X
def
=
H0(X,ωX/OK ) (cf. the discussion preceding Proposition 11.3).
To do this, we argue as follows: Let x ∈ XK(K). Let
ϵx : F ∧
∞ → ˆO
K
be the morphism induced by restriction: i.e., elements of F∞ are sections of L[∞ ], hence
diﬀerentials on X[∞ ]; thus, by taking the residue of such a diﬀerential at x,w eg e ta
residue map F∞ →O
 K; then taking the p-adic completion of this residue map gives us
ϵx. We would like to show in the following that the restriction
ζx : H0(Y,ω Y/ OK ) → ˆO
K
of ϵx to H0(Y,ω Y/ OK ) is zero. If we show this, then this will be also hold for all x′ ∈
XK(K′)( w h e r eK′ is a ﬁnite extension of K), hence (∗)FF
X will follow immediately (from
the fact that FF
X consists precisely of all those diﬀerentials whose residues at every point
are zero).
Thus, let us assume that ζx ̸=0 . L e tIx ⊆ Δ U denote the inertia group (well-deﬁned
up to conjugation) corresponding to x. Then observe that the restriction Ix ⊆ Δ U → Δ Y
of θto ΔU is nontrivial. Indeed, if this restriction were zero, then it is clear from the way
that ζx was constructed (cf. the “comparison theorem” of Proposition 11.3) thatζx would
be zero. Thus, θ(Ix) ̸= {1}. In particular, it follows (by possibly enlarging K) that there
exists an open normal subgroup ΠY ′
K
⊆ ΠYK (corresponding to a covering Y ′
K → YK)s u c h
that: (i) Π Y ′
K
surjects onto ΓK; and (ii) if we let U′
K → UK be the result of pulling back
Y ′
K → YK via θ,t h e nU′
K → UK is a connected Galois covering which is ramiﬁed over x.
Let G
def
=Π YK /ΠY ′
K
.T h u s ,G is a ﬁnite group, and G = Gal(U′
K/UK)=G a l (Y ′
K/YK).
Note that U′
K → UK extends to a ramiﬁed covering X′
K → XK.L e t x′ ∈ XK(K)( w h e r e
we enlarge K if necessary) be a point lying above x.
Now let us denote with primes the objects corresponding to U′
K, X′
K,a n dY ′
K that
are analogous to the objects already constructed for UK, XK,a n dYK.T h u s ,w eh a v e
ϵ′
x′ :( F′
∞ )∧ → ˆO
K
and
ζ′
x′ : H0(Y ′,ωY ′/OK ) → ˆO
K
70

Note that the fact thatζx ̸= 0 implies (sinceζ′
x′ |H0(Y,ωY/ OK ) = ζx)t h a tζ′
x′ ̸=0 .L e tσ ∈ G
be such that σ(x′)= x′, σ ̸= 1. Then the fact that σ ﬁxes x′ implies that σ ﬁxes ϵ′
x′ ,
which, in turn, implies (since the inclusion H0(Y ′,ωY ′/OK ) ↪→ (F′
∞ )∧ is G-equivariant)
that σ ﬁxes ζ′
x′.
On the other hand, by Corollary 13.4 (“preservation of relations”) and the fact
that Y ′
K is not hyperelliptic, it follows that the point of the projective space P ′
K
def
=
P(H0(Y ′,ωY ′/OK )) deﬁned by ζ′
x′ lies on the canonically embedded curve Y ′
K ⊆ P ′
K.
Thus, the fact thatζ′
x′ is ﬁxed by σ implies that Y ′
K admits a ˆ
K-valued point which is ﬁxed
by σ.S i n c eY ′
K → YK = Y ′
K/G is ´etale, however, this is absurd. This contradiction thus
completes the proof that ζx = 0, and hence also the proof of (∗)FF
X .
Let us review what we have done so far. Given a surjective continuous homomorphism
θ:Π UK → ΠYK over ΓK, we have seen that θinduces an injection
H0(YK,ωYK /K) ↪→ H0(XK,ωXK/K)
that preserves relations. Thus, it follows (by using the canonical embedding of YK)t h a t
we get a dominant morphism θU : UK → YK which extends to a morphism
θX : XK → YK
by properness. Moreover, given any ﬁnite Galois ´etale covering Y ′
K → YK whose geometric
part has p-power order, we can pull-back this covering via θ to obtain U′
K → UK (ﬁnite
´etale), X′
K → XK (ﬁnite and possibly ramiﬁed), together with θ′ :Π U ′
K
→ ΠY ′
K
.I f
we then repeat the argument just applied to θ for θ′, we see that we get a morphism
θ′
X′ : X′
K → Y ′
K which lies over θX . If we then continue this procedure for arbitrary
ﬁnite Galois ´etale coverings (whose geometric parts have p-power order), the well-known
correspondence between fundamental groups and categories of ´etale coverings thus shows
that the morphism induced byθU on fundamental groups coincides withθup to composition
with an inner automorphism induced by an element ofΠYK . On the other hand, since both
θ and the morphism induced by θU on fundamental groups have the property that they
lie over ΓK, it follows that the element of Π YK in question must map to the the center
of ΓK. Since, however, ΓK is center-free (see Lemma 15.6 below – one checks easily that
there are no “vicious circles” in the reasoning), it follows that the element in question
must therefore be an element of ΔY ⊆ ΠYK . That is to say, we have essentially proven the
following result:
Theorem 14.1. Let K be a ﬁnite extension of Qp.L e tYK be a hyperbolic curve (not
necessarily proper) over K.L e t UK be the spectrum of a one-dimensional function ﬁeld
over K.L e tHomdom
K (UK,YK) be the set of dominant K-morphisms from UK to YK.L e t
Homopen
ΓK
(ΠUK ,ΠYK ) be the set of open, continuous group homomorphisms ΠUK → ΠYK
over ΓK, considered up to composition with an inner automorphism arising from Δ Y .
Then the natural map
71

Homdom
K (UK,YK) → Homopen
ΓK (ΠUK ,ΠYK )
is bijective.
Proof. We begin by proving that this map isinjective. First, observe that by replacingUK
and YK by coverings deﬁned by “ p-derivates” (as in Deﬁnition 0.2) of ΔU and ΔY (where
we use p-derivates since they are natural), we may assume that both UK and YK admit
hyperbolic compactiﬁcations
 UK and
 Y K (i.e.,
 UK and
 Y K are proper hyperbolic curves
over K). Since dominant K-morphisms UK → YK are the same as dominantK-morphisms
UK →
 Y K, it suﬃces to show that such a morphism
 UK →
 Y K is determined by its
induced morphism Δab
U → Δab
Y (on abelianizations of geometric fundamental groups). But
this follows from the fact that this morphism Δab
U → Δab
Y clearly determines the morphism
between all p-power torsion points of the Jacobians of
 UK and
 Y K, hence it determines
the induced morphism between the Jacobians of
 UK and
 Y K. Moreover, since
 UK and
Y K are both proper hyperbolic (i.e., of genus ≥ 2), they both embed in their Jacobians,
so we conclude that the original morphism
 UK →
 Y K is uniquely determined, as desired.
Next, we consider surjectivity. Let us ﬁrst consider the case where YK is proper.B y
replacing UK by a ﬁnite ´etale covering of UK (and then descending at the end, which is
possible since (by the preceding paragraph) the natural map in the Theorem is injective),
we can assume that the proper model XK of UK is hyperbolic. Note, moreover, that if
θ :Π UK → ΠYK is open, then its image is of ﬁnite index, so by replacing YK by a ﬁnite
´etale covering ofYK, it is clear that we may assume thatθis surjective. Finally, by Lemma
10.4 (4), by replacing YK by a ﬁnite ´etale covering of YK, it is clear that we may assume
that YK is non-hyperelliptic. Now we are in the circumstances considered above, and so
we see that θarises from a geometric morphism UK → YK, as desired. This completes the
proof of the Theorem when YK is proper.
Now let us consider the case when YK is not proper. First note that by replacing YK
by a ﬁnite ´etale covering of YK, we may assume that the compactiﬁcation ZK of YK is
hyperbolic. Now the point is to compose the given θ :Π UK → ΠYK with the morphism
ΠYK → ΠZK arising from the compactiﬁcation inclusion YK ⊆ ZK. Since we know the
Theorem to be true for morphisms betweenUK and ZK, we thus obtain that ΠUK → ΠZK
arises from some dominantUK → ZK (which necessarily factors – sinceUK is the spectrum
of a ﬁeld – through YK, thus yielding a UK → YK). Thus it remains only to see that the
morphism induced on π1’s by this UK → YK is the same as the given θ. But this is done
(as usual) by considering a ﬁnite ´etale covering Y ′
K → YK, and applying the argument just
described to U′
K and Y ′
K to obtain a U′
K → Y ′
K which lies over the UK → YK constructed
previously. As usual, this is enough to show (cf. the argument directly preceding the
statement of Theorem 14.1) that the morphism induced on fundamental groups by the
UK → YK that we constructed is the same as the givenθ. This completes the proof of the
Theorem. ⃝
In fact, we have the following:
72

Corollary 14.2. Let K be a ﬁnite extension of Qp.L e tXK (respectively,YK)b ee i t h e r
a hyperbolic curve (not necessarily proper!) over K or the spectrum of a one-dimensional
function ﬁeld over K.L e t Homdom
K (XK,YK) be the set of dominant K-morphisms from
XK to YK.L e tHomopen
ΓK
(ΠXK ,ΠYK ) be the set of open, continuous group homomorphisms
ΠXK → ΠYK over ΓK, considered up to composition with an inner automorphism arising
from Δ Y . Then the natural map
Homdom
K (XK,YK) → Homopen
ΓK
(ΠXK ,ΠYK )
is bijective.
Proof. By an argument analogous to that of the ﬁnal paragraph of the proof of Theorem
14.1, it follows that it suﬃces to consider the case whereYK is a hyperbolic curve. If UK is
the generic point (considered as a scheme) of XK, then given any open θX :Π XK → ΠYK ,
composing θX with the natural surjection ΠUK → ΠXK induced by UK → XK gives us an
open θU :Π UK → ΠYK . Applying Theorem 14.1 to θU thus gives us a dominant morphism
XK →
 Y K (where
 Y K is the compactiﬁcation of the curveYK). To see that this morphism
factors through YK, it suﬃces to apply this construction toY ′
K → YK,w h e r eY ′
K is a ﬁnite,
geometrically connected (over K), Galois ´etale covering (of p-power order) of YK which
is ramiﬁed over all the points of
 Y K − YK. In fact, we may even choose Y ′
K so that the
ramiﬁcation indices over all the points of
 Y K − YK are larger than the degree of XK over
Y K. Then the fact that we get some X′
K →
 Y
′
K (where X′
K is ´etale over XK) lying
over the morphism XK →
 Y K obtained previously shows that this morphism XK →
 Y K
factors through YK, as desired. This completes the proof of the Corollary. ⃝
Remark. Corollary 14.2 is thus a special case of TheoremA, the ﬁrst main theorem of this
paper. In fact, Corollary 14.2 holds even in the case whereK is only ﬁnitely generated over
Qp. However, unlike the situation in [Mzk2], deriving this ﬁnitely generated case from the
local ﬁeld case is not so trivial, again (cf. the discussion at the end of Section 13) because
of the fact that ΔU is so large. Thus, we save the derivation of the ﬁnitely generated case
for the following Section.
Section 15: Base Fields Finitely Generated over the p-adics
In this Section, we let L be a ﬁnitely generated extension of Qp. We would like to
prove versions of Theorem 14.1 and Corollary 14.2 in the case where the base ﬁeld is L
(as opposed to a ﬁnite extension of Qp). Thus, by induction on the transcendence degree
of L over Qp, we may assume that Theorem 14.1, for instance, is known for all base ﬁelds
whose transcendence degree over Qp is < that of L.
Let XL and YL be proper hyperbolic curves over L.L e t UL be the generic point of
XL (regarded as a scheme). Moreover, let us assume that we have been given acontinuous
surjective homomorphism over ΓL
73

θ:Π UL → ΠYL
Once it is shown that θ factors though Π XL , it is relatively easy to derive that θ arises
geometrically from Theorem 14.1. Thus, the ﬁrst order of business is to show thatθfactors
through ΠXL . To achieve this, we assume that this is not the case. Then (cf. the argument
employed in Section 14) by replacing YL and UL by ﬁnite ´etale coverings Y ′
L → YL and
U′
L → UL (the latter obtained by pulling back the former via θ), we may assume that we
are in the following situation: There is a ﬁnite cyclic group G (with generator σ)a c t i n g
faithfully on UL (hence also XL)a n dYL – via L-linear automorphisms – in such a way that
σ ﬁxes a point x0 ∈ XL(L), but acts without ﬁxed points on YL. Moreover, we assume
that σ ◦θ◦σ−1 coincides with θ up to composition with an inner automorphism deﬁned
by an element of Δ Y . If we can show that these assumptions lead to a contradiction, it
will follow immediately that θfactors through ΠXL .
Let (as usual) HU (respectively, HY ) be the abelianization of Δ U (respectively, ΔY )
regarded as a Γ K-module. Let HP
U ⊆ HU be the closure of the image of all the inertia
groups (cf. the beginning of Section 11). Note that θinduces a ΓK-morphism HU → HY .
Since HY is a ﬁnitely generated Zp-module, it follows that (by possibly replacing L by a
ﬁnite extension of L) there exist points x1,...,x r ∈ XL(L) such that the images of the
corresponding inertia groups θ(Ii)( f o ri =1 ,...,r )i n HY is equal to the image of θ(HP
U )
in HY .
Now let K ⊆ L be a subﬁeld such that L is a one-dimensional function ﬁeld over
K (hence, in particular, we assume that K is algebraically closed in L). Note that such
a K always exists (as long as L is not a ﬁnite extension of Qp). Thus, there exists a
smooth aﬃne model M → Spec(K)o f L such that XL and YL extend to smooth curves
XM → M and YM → M over M. Moreover, we may also assume (by shrinking M)t h a t
x1,...,x r extend to sections s1,...,s r : XM → M whose images are disjoint from one
another, and that σ acts on XM and YM .T h e p o i n tx0 ∈ XL(L) then extends (by the
valuative criterion for properness) to a section s0 : M → XM . Finally, let us observe that
(by further shrinking M), we may assume that σ acts without ﬁxed points on YM .
The ﬁrst thing that we would like to get our hands on is a morphism likeθ,e x c e p tf o r
objects overK, so that we can apply Theorem 14.1 overK (which we know to be true via the
induction hypothesis). To construct such a morphism, we argue as follows. Letm ∈ M(K)
be a point (which, after possibly enlargingK, always exists). Let D be the spectrum of the
completion of OM,m. (Here, one should think of the “D” as standing for “disk.”) Thus, we
may choose an isomorphismD ∼= Spec(K[[t]]) (where t is an indeterminate). Let D∞ → D
be the ramiﬁed covering of inﬁnite degree obtained by adjoining all t
1
N (for N a positive
integer) to OD.L e tp ∈ XM be the prime which is the ﬁber Xm of XM → M over M.L e t
UD be the spectrum of the completion of OXM ,p.T h u s ,UD is the spectrum of a complete
discrete valuation ring with residue ﬁeld equal toK(Um), the function ﬁeld of Xm.L e tηD
(respectively, ηD∞ ) be the generic point of D (respectively, D∞ ). Let UηD
def
= UD ×D ηD.
Thus, UηD is the spectrum of a complete, discretely valued ﬁeld. In particular, it follows
74

from the well-known theory of such ﬁelds (see, e.g., [Ser2]) that if Γ UηD
is the absolute
Galois group of this ﬁeld, then we have an exact sequence
1 → ˆZ(1) → ΓUηD
→ ΓK(Um) → 1
Here the covering corresponding to the ˆZ(1) is given by adjoining all t
1
N (for N a positive
integer) – cf. the covering D∞ → D.
Now let us denote by ΠUηD
the result of replacing the geometric portion (i.e., relative
to the morphism UηD → ηD) of the fundamental group of UηD by its maximal pro- p
quotient. Then we get an exact sequence
1 → Δ Um → ΠUηD
→ ΓηD → 1
If we pull this exact sequence back via ΓηD∞ =Γ K → ΓηD , we thus get an exact sequence
1 → Δ Um → ΠUηD∞
→ ΓηD∞ =Γ K → 1
Moreover, it is easy to see that this last exact sequence can be identiﬁed with
1 → Δ Um → ΠUm → ΓK → 1
On the other hand, if we pull back Π YL → ΓL via ΓK =Γ ηD∞ → ΓL, we get an exact
sequence
1 → Δ Ym → ΠYm → ΓK → 1
Thus, if we pull-back θ via ΓK =Γ ηD∞ → ΓL to obtain a morphism Π UηD∞
→ ΠYηD∞
(where the subscripted ηD∞ denotes “ ⊗LηD∞ ”) and compose with “ π1” of the natural
morphism UηD∞ → UηD∞ , we get a continuous homomorphism
θm :Π Um → ΠYm
over ΓK (where K we regard here as the residue ﬁeld of M at m).
Lemma 15.1. The morphism θm is surjective.
Proof. It suﬃces to show that the restriction of θm to ΔUm surjects onto ΔYm =Δ Y .I n
fact, by the basic theory of p-groups, it suﬃces to show that θm induces a surjection of
Δ Um onto HYm = HY . To see this, it suﬃces to consider (after replacing M by a ﬁnite
75

´etale covering of M, and enlarging K if necessary) a ﬁnite abelian covering Y ′
L → YL
(where Y ′
L → L is geometrically connected) of degree a power of p which is > 1. Let
us pull-back this covering to some covering U ′
L → UL via θ. Then we must show that
the pull-back U′
ηD∞
→U ηD∞ of this covering to UηD∞ is not the trivial covering. Thus,
suppose that it is the trivial covering. Then the covering U′
m → Um that it induces (cf.
the exact sequences above) of Um is again trivial. Since the images of s1,...,s r in Xm
are disjoint this implies ﬁrst of all that U′
L → UL is unramiﬁed at x1,...,x r. But because
of the way in which x1,...,x r were chosen, this implies that the covering Y ′
L → YL was
obtained from a quotient of HY /Im(θ(HP
U )). Thus, it follows that U ′
L → UL extends to
a ﬁnite ´etale covering X′
L → XL. Moreover, since XM is smooth over M at m, it follows
that X′
L → XL is split if and only if the induced X′
m → Xm is split. But this X′
m → Xm
extends the covering U′
m → Um which we already saw to be trivial. Thus, we obtain that
X′
L → XL, hence U′
L → UL is trivial. Since θ is surjective, however, this implies that
Y ′
L → YL is trivial. This contradiction completes the proof of the Lemma. ⃝
Now by the induction hypothesis on the transcendence degree ofL, it follows that θm
arises from some geometric morphism Um → Ym which is compatible with the action of
σ on both sides (since σ is compatible with θ). By the valuative criterion for properness,
this morphism extends to a morphism Xm → Ym.M o r e o v e r ,σ ﬁxes s0(m) ∈ Xm(K), so
s0(m) ∈ Xm(K) is mapped to a ﬁxed point of Ym(K), which is absurd, sinceσ acts on Ym
without ﬁxed points. This contradiction completes the proof of the following result:
Lemma 15.2. Let L be a ﬁnitely generated extension of Qp.L e t XL and YL be
proper hyperbolic curves overL.L e tUL be the generic point of XL. Then any continuous
surjective homomorphism θ:Π UL → ΠYL over ΓL necessarily factors through ΠXL .
Now we can conclude that θarises geometrically, as follows. Consider the M-scheme
HM
def
= Hom M (XM ,YM ) → M.S i n c eYM is hyperbolic, it is well-known that HM is
ﬁnite and unramiﬁed over M. (Indeed, that HM → M is unramiﬁed (respectively, quasi-
ﬁnite; proper) follows since the pull-back of the tangent bundle of Ym to Xm (for any
m ∈ M) has no global sections (respectively, follows from the Hurwitz formula, which
allows one to bound the degree of a morphism Xm → Ym; follows via the same argument
as that used in Lemma 8.3 of [Mzk1]).) By shrinkingM, we may assume that HM is ﬁnite
´etale over M. Then the fact that θm arises geometrically (from some Xm → Ym)s h o w s
that over some ﬁnite extension L′ of L, we have a morphism XL′ → YL′ that specializes
to Xm → Ym.M o r e o v e r , i fM′ is the normalization of M in L′,t h e ns i n c et h ep r o -p
geometric fundamental groups of XM ′ and YM ′ form local systems over M′, it follows (by
checking what happens over the pointm) that the morphism on Δ’s induced byXL′ → YL′
is the same (up to composition with an inner automorphism) as that induced by θ.I n
particular, the morphism HX → HY induced by XL′ → YL′ is the same as that induced
by θ. On the other hand, a morphism from XL to YL (over any ﬁeld) is determined by
the morphism it induces from HX to HY (cf. the proof of the injectivity part of Theorem
14.1). Thus, since the HX → HY in question is ΓL- (not just ΓL′ -) equivariant, we obtain
76

that XL′ → YL′ descends to a XL → YL. By repeating this construction (as usual) for
all ﬁnite ´etale coverings of YL, we also obtain that the morphism induced on fundamental
groups by this XL → YL is the original θ.
That is to say, in summary, we have proven that any θ :Π UL → ΠYL as in Lemma
15.2 necessarily arises geometrically from some morphismUL → YL. Thus, by arguments
formally analogous to those of the proofs of Theorem 14.1 and Corollary 14.2, we obtain
the following analogue of Corollary 14.2:
Corollary 15.3. Let K be a ﬁnitely generated ﬁeld extension of Qp.L e t XK (re-
spectively, YK) be either a hyperbolic curve over K or the spectrum of a one-dimensional
function ﬁeld over K.L e t Homdom
K (XK,YK) be the set of dominant K-morphisms from
XK to YK.L e tHomopen
ΓK
(ΠXK ,ΠYK ) be the set of open, continuous group homomorphisms
ΠXK → ΠYK over ΓK, considered up to composition with an inner automorphism arising
from Δ Y . Then the natural map
Homdom
K (XK,YK) → Homopen
ΓK (ΠXK ,ΠYK )
is bijective.
It turns out that it is most natural to generalize Corollary 15.3 to the case where the
long and unwieldy expression “hyperbolic curve/spectrum of a one-dimensional function
ﬁeld deﬁned over a ﬁnitely generated ﬁeld extension of Q
p” is replaced by the much shorter
expression “ pro-hyperbolic curve over a sub- p-adic ﬁeld .” Thus, we make the following
deﬁnition: Let K be a ﬁeld. Let XK be a K-scheme.
Deﬁnition 15.4. (i) We shall call a ﬁeldK a sub-p-adic ﬁeld if there exists a prime num-
ber p, together with a ﬁnitely generated ﬁeld extension L of Qp such that K is isomorphic
to a subﬁeld of L.
(ii) We shall call XK a hyperbolic pro-curve (over K)i f XK can be written as the projec-
tive limit of a projective system of hyperbolic curves over K such that all the transition
morphisms in the projective system are birational.
Thus, the following are all examples of sub-p-adic ﬁelds :
(1) ﬁnitely generated (in particular, ﬁnite) extensions of Qp
(2) number ﬁelds (i.e., ﬁnite extensions of Q)
(3) the subﬁeld of
 Q which is the composite of all number ﬁelds of degree
≤ n over Q (for some ﬁxed integer n).
77

Another way to think of a pro-hyperbolic curve XK is as the result of removing some set
(possibly inﬁnite, possibly empty ) of closed points from some hyperbolic curve. In partic-
ular, the notion of a “hyperbolic pro-curve” generalizes both the notion of a hyperbolic
curve and the case of the spectrum of a function ﬁeld of dimension one. Then we have the
following result:
Corollary 15.5. Let K be sub-p-adic.L e t X
K (respectively, YK) be a hyperbolic
pro-curve over K.L e t Homdom
K (XK,YK) be the set of dominant K-morphisms from XK
to YK.L e t Homopen
ΓK
(ΠXK ,ΠYK ) be the set of open, continuous group homomorphisms
ΠXK → ΠYK over ΓK, considered up to composition with an inner automorphism arising
from Δ Y . Then the natural map
Homdom
K (XK,YK) → Homopen
ΓK
(ΠXK ,ΠYK )
is bijective.
Proof. First, let us observe that if K is a ﬁnitely generated ﬁeld extension of Qp,t h e n
Corollary 15.5 follows immediately from Corollary 15.3 by arguments formally analogous
to those of the proofs of Theorem 14.1 and Corollary 14.2. Thus, the only (slightly)
“new” phenomenon here is the fact that we allowK to be a subﬁeld of a ﬁnitely generated
extension of Q
p. The argument for such subﬁelds is as follows: Let K be a subﬁeld of a
ﬁnitely generated extension ﬁeld L of Qp. Suppose that we have been given XK and YK
as in the statement of Corollary 15.5, as well as an open θ:Π XK → ΠYK over ΓK.L e tu s
denote by θgeom the morphism ΔX → Δ Y induced by θon geometric fundamental groups.
By base-changing to L and applying the Corollary 15.5 overL, we obtain that there exists
a morphism φL : XL → YL whose induced morphism on geometric fundamental groups
coincides with that deﬁned by θ. On the other hand, since morphisms between hyperbolic
curves (hence also hyperbolic pro-curves), clearly have no moduli (cf. the fact that the
scheme HM of the discussion preceding Corollary 15.3 was ﬁnite and unramiﬁed over M),
it follows thatφL descends to a ﬁnite Galois extensionK′ of K. Thus, we have a morphism
φK′ : XK′ → YK′ . It remains to descend φK′ to K. But this follows from the fact that
if σ ∈ Gal(K′/K), then conjugating φK′ by σ gives a morphism φσ
K′ : XK′ → YK′ whose
induced morphism on geometric fundamental groups is the result of conjugating θgeom by
σ. On the other hand, θgeom arises from θ which lies over ΓK,s o θgeom is ﬁxed (up to
composition with an inner automorphism deﬁned by an element of Δ Y ) by conjugation
by σ.T h u s ,φK′ and φσ
K′ induce the same morphism on geometric fundamental groups,
hence coincide (cf. the argument of the discussion preceding Corollary 15.3). This shows
that φ
K′ descends to a morphism φK : XK → YK. Repeating this construction (as usual
– cf. the argument preceding the statement of Theorem 14.1) for coverings of XK and YK
shows that the morphism induced by φK on fundamental groups coincides with θ (up to
composition with an inner automorphism deﬁned by an element of Δ Y ). ⃝
Remark. Note that in Corollaries 15.3 and 15.5, in fact, we implicitly used the fact that
78

for K as in those Corollaries, ΓK is center-free. This may be proven as follows. First, if
K is a ﬁnite extension of Qp, then we have the following:
Lemma 15.6. If K is a ﬁnite extension of Qp, then the group ΓK is center-free.
Proof. (The argument given here is “well-known,” but was related to the author by A.
Tamagawa.) Since one knows explicitly (see, e.g., [Ser2], Chapter IV, §2) the structure of
Gal(Ktm/K), it is clear that the quotient Gal( Ktm/K)o fΓ K is center-free. Thus, the
center of ΓK must lie in ΓKtm ⊆ ΓK. On the other hand, ΓKtm is a pro-p group. Moreover,
it follows immediately from the facts that
(1) H2(K, Fp(1)) = Fp;
(2) if K′ is a ﬁnite unramiﬁed extension of K of degree p (which always
exists), then the natural morphism H2(K, Fp(1)) → H2(K′, Fp(1)) is
zero;
that H2(ΓKtm , Fp) = 0. But by [Shatz], Chapter III, §3, Proposition 2.3, this is enough
to imply that ΓKtm is free (as a pro-p group), which implies that its center is trivial (see,
e.g., [Tama], §1, Propositions 1.1, 1.11). ⃝
Next, we consider the case of a ﬁnitely generated extension of Qp:
Lemma 15.7. Suppose that K0 is a ﬁeld of characteristic zero with the property that
every open subgroup of ΓK0 is center-free. Then any ﬁnitely generated ﬁeld extension K
of K0 also has this property. In particular, if K is a ﬁnitely generated ﬁeld extension of
Qp,t h e nΓK is center-free.
Proof. The last statement follows from the ﬁrst plus Lemma 15.6. Thus, let us prove
the ﬁrst statement. Note that an extension of a center-free group by a center-free group
is center-free. Thus, it suﬃces to prove that if L is a function ﬁeld (of arbitrary ﬁnite
dimension) over
 K0,t h e nΓL is center-free. Next, note that the projective limit of a
projective system of center-free groups in which all the transition morphisms aresurjective
is center-free. Moreover, as is well-known, Spec(L) is a projective limit of “hyperbolic Artin
neighborhoods” over
 K0 (i.e., successive ﬁbrations of hyperbolic curves – see [SGA4], XI
3.3). Thus, it suﬃces to prove that the fundamental group of such an Artin neighborhood
is center-free. But this then reduces to showing that the fundamental group of a hyperbolic
curve is center-free, which is well-known (see, e.g., [Tama], §1, Proposition 1.11). ⃝
This is already enough for Corollary 15.3. Now we can conclude the result for arbitrary
K as in Corollary 15.5 by means of the following Lemma (due to A. Tamagawa):
79

Lemma 15.8. Let K be sub-p-adic. Then ΓK is center-free.
Proof. Let K′ be a ﬁnitely generated ﬁeld extension of Qp that contains K. Suppose
that σ ∈ ΓK lies in the center of ΓK, but is not equal to the identity. Then there exists
a ﬁnite Galois extension L of K such that σ maps to an element of Gal(L/K) other than
the identity. Write L = K(α), for some α ∈ L.L e t EL be an elliptic curve over L with
j-invariant α.L e t XL be the complement of “0” in EL.T h u s ,XL is a hyperbolic curve
over L.L e t YL be the result of base-changing XL by σ : L → L. Thus, it follows that
XL and YL are isomorphic as schemes over K. Moreover, conjugating by σ deﬁnes an
isomorphism Π XL
∼= ΠYL which lies over ΓL because σ is in the center of Γ K. Base-
changing this isomorphism to L′ (the composite of K′ and L over K), we get a Γ L′ -
isomorphism ΠXL′
∼= ΠYL′ . By Corollary 15.3 (in fact, really, this follows already from the
results of [Mzk2]), we obtain that this isomorphism arises from an L′-isomorphism of XL′
with YL′ . But this implies that the j-invariants of the compactifying elliptic curves ofXL′
and YL′ are the same, i.e., that α = ασ ∈ L ⊆ L′, which is absurd. This contradiction
completes the proof of the Lemma. ⃝
Section 16: Maps F rom Higher-Dimensional F unction Fields to Curves
Let K be sub-p-adic (cf. Deﬁnition 15.4 (i)). Let UK be the spectrum of a function
ﬁeld over K. (Note that here, we do not assume that the dimension of the function ﬁeld is
one.) Let XK be a smooth projective model of UK (which exists by [Hiro]). Thus, UK is
the generic point ofXK.L e tn be the dimension ofXK. By abuse of terminology, we shall
also say that n is the “dimension of UK over K.” Since the one-dimensional case has been
dealt with previously, we assume here that n ≥ 2. The purpose of this Section is to prove
a result like Corollary 15.5, except for morphisms betweenUK and a hyperbolic pro-curve.
Let L be a very ample line bundle on XK.L e t
V
def
=Γ (XK, L)
Since the dimension of XK is ≥ 2, and L is very ample, it follows that dim K(V ) ≥ 3.
Let W ′ ⊆ V be a one-dimensional (over K) subspace, generated by a section of L whose
zero locus forms a smooth, connected subvariety of XK. (Note that by Bertini’s theorem
(see, e.g., Theorem 6.3, pp. 66, of [Jou]), it is well-known that such a W ′ exists.) Let
W ⊆ V be a two-dimensional subspace containingW ′. Choose a basis {e1,e2} for W such
that e1 ∈ W ′.L e t e3 ∈ V be an element whose image in V/W is nonzero. Let us also
assume that the common zero locus in XK of the three sections e1,e2,e3 is a subscheme
of XK of codimension ≥ 3. (This can always be achieved by choosing e1,e2,e3 suﬃciently
generically.) Let K′ = K(t)( w h e r et is an indeterminate). Let s1
def
= t; s2
def
= t−1.T h e nw e
can construct a new two-dimensional subspace ˜W ⊆ VK′
def
= V ⊗K K′,o v e rK′, as follows:
80

We let ˜W be the subspace generated by the vectors ˜e1
def
= e1 + s1 · e3, ˜e2
def
= e2 + s2 · e3.
Thus, to summarize, we have the following situation:
W ′ ⊆ W ⊆ K · e1 + K · e2 + K · e3 ⊆ V
∥∥ ∥
K · e1 ⊆ K · e1 + K · e2 ⊆ K · e1 + K · e2 + K · e3
˜W = K′ · ˜e1 + K′ · ˜e2 ⊆ VK′ = V ⊗K K′; K′ = K(t)
˜e1 = e1 + s1 · e3; ˜e2
def
= e2 + s2 · e3; s1 = t; s2 = t−1
Lemma 16.1. Let Ω be an algebraically closed ﬁeld containing K′. Then there do not
exist any one-dimensional subspaces W ′′ of ˜WΩ
def
= ˜W ⊗K′ Ω such that W ′′ is deﬁned (as
as u b s p a c eo fV ⊗K Ω) over a ﬁnite extension of K.
Proof. Indeed, if such a W ′′ existed, then there would exist elements a,b,c ∈ Ω( w i t h
c ̸= 0, and at least one of a, b nonzero), together with α1,α2,α3 ∈
 K such that
a · ˜e1 + b · ˜e2 = c · (α1 · e1 + α2 · e2 + α3 · e3)
By dividing a and b by c, we may assume that c = 1. Then, equating the coeﬃcients of
e1, e2, e3, we obtain that a = α1; b = α2; s1 · a + s2 · b = α3. But this implies that t, t−1,
and 1 (as elements of K′) are linearly dependent over
 K, which is absurd. This completes
the proof of the Lemma. ⃝
Before proceeding, let us pause to interpret what this Lemma means. Note that the
3-dimensional K-subspace of V generated by e1,e2,e3 deﬁnes a rational morphism ψ from
XK to QK
def
= P(K · e1 + K · e2 + K · e3). Thus, ψ is deﬁned outside of some closed
subscheme of XK of codimension ≥ 2. Moreover, note that the inverse image via ψ of any
closed point of QK is a subscheme of XK of codimension ≥ 2. (Indeed, this follows from
the fact that the common zero locus of e1,e2,e3 has codimension ≥ 3i n XK.) Now let Ω
be a ﬁnite extension of K′, and let us consider a one-dimensional (over Ω) subspace W ′′
of ˜WΩ.T h u s ,W ′′ corresponds to a line LΩ ⊆ QΩ
def
= QK ⊗K Ω, and the zero locus (in
XΩ
def
= XK ⊗K Ω) of a nonzero section of W ′′ is equal to the closure of ψ−1
Ω (LΩ) ⊆ XΩ.
Now we are ready to interpret Lemma 16.1: Namely, I claim thatLemma 16.1 implies
that no irreducible component of the (closure of the) divisor ψ−1
Ω (LΩ) is deﬁned over
 K.
81

Indeed, if there were a divisor D ⊆ XK such that ψΩ(DΩ) ⊆ LΩ, then by spreading out Ω
(respectively, LΩ) to a smooth aﬃne curveCK over K (respectively, a family of lines inQK
parametrized by CK), we obtain that for every closed point c ∈ CK,w eh a v eψ(D) ⊆ Lc.
But since (by Lemma 16.1) LΩ is not deﬁned over
 K, it follows that for two suﬃciently
generic closed points c, c′ ∈ CK,d i mK(Lc
⋂ Lc′ ) = 0, which implies that D is contained
in the inverse image of a ﬁnite set of closed points of QK. But we saw in the preceding
paragraph that the inverse image via ψ of a closed point of QK is of codimension ≥ 2.
Since D is a divisor, this is absurd. This completes the proof of the claim stated at the
beginning of this paragraph.
Next, let us base-change UK and XK to K′: this gives rise to UK′ and XK′ .T h e
two-dimensional subspace ˜W ⊆ VK′ deﬁnes a rational map from XK′ to PK′
def
= P(˜W). Let
X′
K′ ⊆ XK′ be the complement of the indeterminacy locus of this rational map. Thus, the
complement of X′
K′ in XK′ is of codimension ≥ 2, and, moreover, we obtain a dominant
morphism (a “pencil”)
ξ: X′
K′ → PK′
Let ηP be the generic point of PK′ .L e t
 ηP be the spectrum of an algebraic closure of
K(ηP ) (the function ﬁeld of PK′ ). Let
FηP ⊆ XηP
def
= XK ×K ηP
be the divisor which is the zero locus of the section of L⊗ K K(ηP ) deﬁned by the generic
point ηP of PK′ .( T h u s ,FηP → ηP is proper.) Put another way, FηP is the (closure inXηP
of the) ﬁber (⊆ X′
ηP ⊆ XηP ) of the morphism ξover the generic point ηP ∈ PK′ (whence
the use of the letter “F”). Since the pencil PK′ contains ˜e1, which is a genericization ofe1
(i.e., e1 is the specialization of ˜e1 at s1 = t = 0), and the zero locus ofe1 is (geometrically)
smooth and connected, it follows thatFηP will also be geometrically smooth and connected
over ηP . Moreover, by the Lefshetz hyperplane theorem (see, e.g., [SGA2]), it follows (since
dimK(XK) ≥ 2) that the natural morphism
π1(F
ηP ) → π1(X
ηP )= π1(X
K
′ )= π1(X
K)
is surjective.L e t
GηP
def
= FηP ×XηP
UηP = FηP ×XK UK
Since UK is a projective limit of dense open subschemes of XK, it thus follows that GηP
is a projective limit of open subschemes of FηP . Moreover, since FηP (thought of as (the
closure of) the ﬁber of the dominant morphismξover the generic pointηP of PK′ ) contains
(as a dense open subset) a scheme which is a projective limit of dense open subschemes of
X
K′ , we conclude that GηP is an integral, nonempty scheme.
82

At any rate, we get a natural morphism
π1(G
ηP ) → π1(U
ηP )= π1(U
K
′ )= π1(U
K)
Now we have the following important
Lemma 16.2. This morphism π1(G
ηP ) → π1(U
K) is surjective.
Proof. It suﬃces to take a ﬁnite, connected ´ etale covering ˜U
K → U
K (of degree > 1),
pull it back to a covering ˜G
ηP → G
ηP over G
ηP , and show that this pulled back covering
can never be split. Indeed, suppose that ˜G
ηP → G
ηP is split. Now observe that since ξis
dominant, it follows that F
ηP → X
K
′ and G
ηP → U
K
′ are dominant. In fact, FηP → XK′
and GηP → UK′ are even birational isomorphisms. Moreover, I claim that the divisors (in
XK′ ) that were thrown out of XK′ to create FηP – let us call these divisors F-divisors –
are diﬀerent from the divisors that were thrown out ofXK′ to create UK′ – which we shall
call U-divisors. Indeed, as divisors of XK′ = XK ⊗K K′,t h eU-divisors are all deﬁned
over ﬁnite extensions of K, whereas the F-divisors (which are just ﬁbers of ξ over closed
points of PK′ ) are, by Lemma 16.1 (see also the interpretation of Lemma 16.1 in the two
paragraphs following the proof of Lemma 16.1), never deﬁned over ﬁnite extensions of K.
This proves the claim.
Next, let us observe that the morphism F
ηP → FηP is ramiﬁed only over F-divisors.
Thus, it is unramiﬁed over U-divisors. Since G
ηP → F
ηP is birational, the fact that
˜G
ηP → G
ηP splits (hence, in particular, extends to a ﬁnite ´etale covering over F
ηP )t h u s
implies that the original ˜U
K → U
K is unramiﬁed over the U-divisors, i.e., ˜U
K → U
K arises
from a covering ˜X
K → X
K. (Here we use “purity of the branch locus” for regular local
rings – see, e.g., [SGA2], Expos´e X, p. 118, Th´eor`eme 3.4.) But then the fact that the
pull-back ˜F
ηP → F
ηP of this covering to F
ηP does not split follows from the surjectivity
observed immediately before the statement of this Lemma. Thus, since G
ηP → F
ηP is
birational, it follows that ˜G
ηP → G
ηP cannot split either. This contradiction completes
the proof of the Lemma. ⃝
Now let us assume that we are given a surjective continuous homomorphism over ΓK
θ:Π UK → ΠYK
where YK is a proper hyperbolic curve over K.L e t YηP
def
= YK ×K ηP .T h u s ,YηP is a
proper hyperbolic curve over ηP . Suppose, moreover, that we know that morphisms like
θ necessarily arise geometrically (i.e., from a dominant morphism UK → YK)f o r UK
of dimension <n . (We shall refer to this assumption as the “Induction Hypothesis.”
83

Note that by Corollary 15.5, we already know that this induction hypothesis is true for
dimK(UK) = 1.) Then the morphism
ΠGηP
→ ΠYK
obtained by composing (“π1 of”) the natural morphismGηP → UK with θlies over ΓηP →
ΓK, and by Lemma 16.2, is such that it induces a surjection between the (maximal pro-
p quotients of the) respective geometric fundamental groups. Moreover, this morphism
naturally deﬁnes a morphism
θG :Π GηP
→ ΠYηP
(since ΠYηP
is the ﬁbered product of Π YK and ΓηP over ΓK). Thus, to summarize, θG is
a surjective continuous homomorphism over ΓηP .
Let UG
ηP be the generic point of GηP . Thus, by composing (“ π1 of”) UG
ηP → GηP with
θG, we obtain a continuous surjective homomorphism
θUG :Π UG
ηP
→ ΠYηP
over ηP . Moreover, the dimension ofUG
ηP over ηP is <n .T h u s ,by the induction hypothesis,
it follows thatθUG arises geometrically, from someunique dominant morphismUG
ηP → YηP .
Projecting to YK′ then gives a dominant morphism UG
ηP → YK′ .
We would like to observe that this morphism UG
ηP → YK′ extends to UK′ . Indeed,
to see this, observe that UG
ηP and UK′ are both projective limits of open subsets of the
projective K′-variety XK′ .M o r e o v e r ,UK′ can be written as the projective limit of K′-
smooth open subsets of XK′ . Thus, the fact that we get a morphism
UK′ → YK′
follows from the following
Lemma 16.3. Let L be a ﬁeld; YL be a proper, smooth, geometrically connected curve
of nonzero genus over L;a n dZL be a smooth L-variety. Suppose that we have a rational
map φ from ZL to YL.T h e nφ is deﬁned over all of ZL.
Proof. This Lemma is a well-known consequence of the classical theory of the Albanese
variety (see, e.g., [Lang]): Namely, let UL ⊆Z L be a (nonempty) open over which φ is
deﬁned. Assume (without loss of generality) that YL(L) ̸= ∅.L e t AL be the Jacobian of
YL,a n dl e tBL be its dual. Then a point of YL(L) deﬁnes an embedding YL ↪→A L which
we can compose with φ to obtain a rational map φA from ZL to AL. It suﬃces to show
84

that φA extends to a morphism on ZL. But note that the portion of φA which already is
a morphism (from UL to AL) deﬁnes (by pulling back the Poincar´e bundle on AL ×L BL)
a line bundle on UL ×L BL.S i n c eZL ×L BL is a regular scheme, it follows that this line
bundle extends to ZL ×L BL. Then taking the classifying morphism associated to this
extended line bundle gives a morphism ZL →A L, as desired. ⃝
Let us review what we have done so far. We started with a continuous surjective
homomorphism
θ:Π UK → ΠYK
over ΓK. Moreover, we have shown that if we base-change θfrom K to K′ to obtain
θK′ :Π UK′ → ΠYK′
then θK′ arises geometrically from some dominant UK′ → YK′ . Note, moreover, that this
morphism UK′ → YK′ is the unique morphism that gives rise to (the geometric portion
of) θ. (This follows, for instance, from the inductive hypothesis on n.M o r e o v e r , t h i s
uniqueness also holds, of course, over any ﬁnite extension of K′.) Thus, if we specialize
the indeterminate t ∈ K′ to some element of a ﬁnite extension L of K that is suﬃciently
generic so that UK′ → YK′ specializes to UL → YL, and then base-change this UL → YL
back up to a morphism UL′ → YL′ (where L′ is the composite of K′ and L), then this
morphism UL′ → YL′ coincides with the morphism obtained by base-changing the original
UK′ → YK′ via K′ ⊆ L′. But this means that the original UK′ → YK′ is, in fact, deﬁned
over L. Finally, since K′ and L are linearly disjoint over K, it follows that the original
UK′ → YK′ is deﬁned over K. Thus, we get a morphism UK → YK which clearly induces
the original θ(since, for instance, ΠUK′ → ΠUK is surjective).
Let us step back now and take stock of what we have done so far in this Section. We
started with UK, the spectrum of a function ﬁeld over K, and a proper hyperbolic curve
YK over K. Then given any surjective continuous homomorphism
θ:Π UK → ΠYK
over ΓK, we showed that θ necessarily arises geometrically. Now let us pause for a deﬁni-
tion:
Deﬁnition 16.4. Let QK be a K-scheme. We shall call QK a smooth pro-variety if it
is the projective limit of a projective system of smooth (geometrically connected) varieties
over K such that the transition morphisms are all birational.
Now Lemma 16.3, plus the techniques of the proofs of Theorem 14.1 and Corollary 14.2
show that we have, in fact, proven the following (our ﬁrst main theorem – Theorem A in
the Introduction):
85

Theorem 16.5. Let K be sub-p-adic (cf. Deﬁnition 15.4 (i)). Let XK (respectively,YK)
be a smooth pro-variety (respectively, hyperbolic pro-curve) overK.L e tHomdom
K (XK,YK)
the set of dominant K-morphisms from XK to YK.L e tHomopen
ΓK
(ΠXK ,ΠYK ) be the set of
open, continuous group homomorphismsΠXK → ΠYK over ΓK, considered up to composi-
tion with an inner automorphism arising from Δ Y . Then the natural map
Homdom
K (XK,YK) → Homopen
ΓK
(ΠXK ,ΠYK )
is bijective.
Remark. Finally, we make the following important observation:
Note that given any pro-p result such as Theorem 16.5, one can always
immediately derive a corresponding proﬁnite result from it.
(Here by “corresponding proﬁnite result,” we mean the same result, except that “Π”
(respectively, “Δ”) is replaced by “Π prf ” (respectively, “Δprf”).) Indeed, suppose that K,
XK,a n dYK are as in the statement of Theorem 16.5, and let
θ:Π prf
XK
= π1(XK) → Πprf
YK
= π1(YK)
be an open homomorphism over Γ K. Then note that θ immediately induces an open
homomorphism θp :Π XK → ΠYK . Applying Theorem 16.5 shows that θp arises from
some φ : XK → YK. Thus, it remains only to show that the morphism induced by φ
on fundamental groups coincides with θ. But this follows from the argument preceding
Theorem 14.1: namely, we consider an arbitrary ﬁnite ´etale covering Y ′
K → YK. Pulling
this covering back via θ gives a ﬁnite ´etale covering X′
K → XK.M o r e o v e r ,θ induces a
morphism between the full proﬁnite fundamental groups ofX′
K and Y ′
K. Next, observe that
this morphism gives us a φ′ : X′
K → Y ′
K (by the same argument as that used to construct
φ from θ) which (by naturality of the constructions involved) lies over φ.T h u s , i f w e
continue this procedure for arbitrary ﬁnite ´etale coverings, the well-known correspondence
between fundamental groups and categories of ´etale coverings shows that the morphism
induced by φ on fundamental groups coincides with θ up to composition with an inner
automorphism induced by an element of Δ prf
Y . This completes the proof of the “proﬁnite
analogue of Theorem 16.5.”
Section 17: Maps Between Higher-Dimensional F unction Fields
Let K be sub-p-adic (cf. Deﬁnition 15.4 (i)). Let L and M be function ﬁelds (of
arbitrary dimension) over K. (Thus, in particular, we assume here that K is algebraically
closed in L and M). We denote by Γ L and ΓM the absolute Galois groups of L and
86

M, respectively. In this Section, we would like to show how to derive a result (Theorem
17.1, which is stated as Theorem B in the Introduction) like Theorem 16.5 for morphisms
between L and M (over K).
Theorem 17.1. Let K be sub-p-adic (cf. Deﬁnition 15.4 (i)). Let L and M be func-
tion ﬁelds of arbitrary dimension over K.L e t HomK(Spec(L),Spec(M)) be the set of
K-morphisms from M to L.L e t Homopen
ΓK
(ΓL,ΓM ) be the set of open, continuous group
homomorphisms ΓL → ΓM over ΓK, considered up to composition with an inner automor-
phism arising from Ker(ΓM → ΓK). Then the natural map
HomK(Spec(L),Spec(M)) → Homopen
ΓK
(ΓL,ΓM )
is bijective.
Proof. First, recall (cf. the Remark following Theorem 16.5) that any pro- p result such
as Theorem 16.5 always implies a corresponding proﬁnite result. Now we use induction
on the transcendence degree – which we shall henceforth denote by dim
K(M)–o f M over
K.W h e n d i mK(M) = 0, the result is vacuous. When dim K(M) = 1, the result follows
from the proﬁnite version of Theorem 16.5; thus, we may assume that dimK(M) > 1. Now
suppose that we know Theorem 17.1 to be true for maps to functions ﬁelds of transcendence
degree < dim
K(M). Suppose that we are given an open continuous homomorphism
θ:Γ L → ΓM
over ΓK. Observe that just as previously (e.g., in the proof of Theorem 14.1), we can
assume without loss of generality that θis surjective.
Next, observe that there exists a function ﬁeld P ⊆ M such that 0 < dimK(P) <
dimK(M). Moreover, we may assume that P is algebraically closed in M.T h u s , w e
get a surjection Γ M → ΓP .C o m p o s i n gθ with this surjection, we obtain a surjection
θP :Γ L → ΓP , which, by the induction hypothesis on dim K(M), we know arises geo-
metrically from some P↪ → L (over K). Moreover, since θP is surjective, it follows that
P is algebraically closed in L. Thus, we may regard L and M as function ﬁelds over P.
Moreover, dimP (M) < dimK(M). Thus, since θ :Γ L → ΓM is (by the deﬁnition of θP )
a morphism over ΓP , it follows from the induction hypothesis on dim K(M)t h a tθ arises
from some M↪ → L over P (hence also over K). This completes the proof of the Theorem.
⃝
Remark. Note that in this case, we needed to work with proﬁnite (not pro-p) fundamental
groups because the operation of taking the maximal pro- p quotient is not well-behaved
with respect to ﬁbrations: i.e., if we had replaced Ker(Γ M → ΓK) with its maximal
pro-p quotient, we would run into trouble because it is not clear that the maximal pro- p
quotient of Ker(ΓM → ΓP ) injects into the maximal pro- p quotient of Ker(ΓM → ΓK).
87

Also, we needed to work with function ﬁelds (as opposed to varieties) because, if, for
instance, Spec(L) and Spec(P) had been varieties, the fact that the geometric (over K)
fundamental group of Spec(L) surjects onto that of Spec(P) does not necessarily imply that
the morphism Spec( L) → Spec(P) has geometrically connected ﬁbers. Moreover, if the
generic geometric ﬁber of Spec(L) → Spec(P)h a sseveral distinct connected components, it
is not necessarily the case that the fundamental group of any of these connected components
surjects onto the geometric (overP) fundamental group of Spec(M). Indeed, by replacing
Spec(M) by a smooth projective variety YK (of dimension ≥ 3), and Spec( L)b yt h e
result – call it XK – of cutting this variety with a generic hyperplane section, then the
inclusion XK ↪→ YK induces an isomorphism on geometric fundamental groups despite
the fact that XK is not isomorphic to YK. Moreover, note that such a counterexample to
a “variety version” of Theorem 17.1 exists even if YK is “hyperbolic” (say, a product of
proper hyperbolic curves), in which case, one would expect XK (at least if the ample line
bundle used to cut YK to form XK has suﬃciently high degree) to be “quite hyperbolic,”
as well.
Section 18: T runcated F undamental Groups
If Δ is a topological group, let us introduce the following notation: Δ {0}
def
=Δ ;f o r
i ≥ 1, Δ {i}
def
=[ Δ {i−1}, Δ {i−1}]. Also, let us write “Πi” (respectively, “Δi”) for Π/Δ {i}
(respectively, Δ/Δ {i}). The purpose of this Section is to observe that much of the theory
of this paper continues to hold to a large extent even when we consider morphisms not
between the full Π’s, but between certain truncated versions of the Π’s. Our ﬁrst main
result is the following:
Theorem 18.1. Let K be sub-p-adic (cf. Deﬁnition 15.4 (i)). Let X
K be a smooth
variety over K.L e tYK be a hyperbolic curve over K.L e tn ≥ 5. Then every continuous
open homomorphism
θ:Π n
XK → Πn
YK
over ΓK induces a dominant morphism μ : XK → YK whose induced morphism on fun-
damental groups coincides (up to composition with an inner automorphism arising from
Δ
YK ) with the morphism Δ n−3
XK → Δ n−3
YK deﬁned by considering θ“modulo Δ {n − 3}.”
Proof. First let us consider the case where: (i) K is a ﬁnite extension of Qp; (ii) XK
is a curve; (iii) YK is a non-hyperelliptic proper hyperbolic curve; (iv) n = 3. Then note
that the theory of Sections 1 through 5 manifestly only involves Δ 2
XK . It thus follows
immediately (via the help of a technical lemma – Lemma 18.4 below – necessary in order
to assure that Lemma 7.3 goes through in the truncated context) that to prove Proposition
7.4, we really only used Δ
2
Y ′ηS
. Thus, in summary, as long as the covering Y ′
ηS → YηS (in
88

the notation of the discussion preceding Proposition 7.4) arises from an open subgroup of
Π1
YK , we can apply Proposition 7.4 to Y ′
ηS to conclude that Y ′
ηS admits a line bundle of
degree prime to p.
Now we would like to conclude the “preservation of relations.” Note that Section 11
manifestly only involves the abelianization of the geometric fundamental group. More-
over, Section 12 is just formal manipulation. In Section 13, the only thing from Sections
1 through 7 that is used is Proposition 7.4 (whose applicability under the present circum-
stances was discussed in the preceding paragraph). Thus, by using Propositions 7.4 and
8.1, Lemma 8.2, and the theory of Section 9, we may conclude “preservation of relations”
for the morphism H
0(YK,ωYK /K) → H0(XK,ωXK/K) induced by Δ 1
XK → Δ1
YK . (Note,
however, that this time, in the application of Section 9, we take for our tower of coverings
“ Xn
L” not the coverings corresponding to thep-derivates of thewhole geometric fundamen-
tal group Δ, but rather the p-derivates of Δ1 – which is enough to carry out the argument
of Section 9.) Hence we get a morphism μ : XK → YK.
Now let us lift the hypothesis that n = 3. Then we obtain the following: If Y ′
K → YK
is a covering arising from an open subgroup of Π n−3
YK
,a n d X′
K → XK is a connected
component of the pull-back of this covering to XK via θ, then we get a natural morphism
μ′ : X′
K → Y ′
K. Moreover, the naturality of the construction of this morphism means that
it always lies over the morphism XK → YK. Thus, it follows by the usual argument (i.e.,
the one preceding Theorem 14.1) that the morphism induced byμ on fundamental groups
is equal to θ modulo Δ {n − 3} (up to composition with an inner automorphism arising
from Δ YK ).
So far we have not used that n ≥ 5. (In fact, we have only used that n ≥ 3.)
The purpose of assuming that n ≥ 5 is to lift hypothesis (iii) (in the ﬁrst paragraph of
this proof). Namely, given any hyperbolic curve YK, it is elementary to show that there
always exists a covering Y ′
K → YK deﬁned by an open subgroup of Π 2
YK such that the
compactiﬁcation
 Y
′
K of Y ′
K is hyperbolic and non-hyperelliptic, and such that
 Y
′
K →
 Y K
has arbitrarily large (speciﬁed) ramiﬁcation over all the points of
 Y K − YK.T h u s , w eg e ta
map X′
K →
 Y
′
K which descends to a map XK →
 Y K. Moreover, the fact that X′
K → XK
is ´etale, while
 Y
′
K →
 Y K is ramiﬁed over the points of
 Y K − YK (with ramiﬁcation indices
arbitrarily large) implies that the map XK →
 Y K factors through YK.T h u s , w e g e t a
map XK → YK, as desired. Then arguing as in the preceding paragraph completes the
proof, albeit still under the assumptions (i) and (ii) (of the ﬁrst paragraph of the proof).
The extension to the case of ﬁeldsK that are subﬁelds of ﬁnitely generated extensions
of Qp then follows via the same “specialization argument” as that employed previously
in the nontruncated case (following Lemma 15.2). Thus, we can also lift assumption (i).
Finally, the “cutting with a hyperplane argument” of Section 16 extends immediately to
the truncated case. This allows us to lift assumption (ii), thus completing the proof of the
Theorem. ⃝
Theorem 18.2. Let K be a subﬁeld of a ﬁnitely generated ﬁeld extension of Q
p.L e t
XK be a smooth pro-variety over K.L e tYK be a hyperbolic pro-curve over K.L e tn′
0 be
89

the minimum transcendence degree overQp of all ﬁnitely generated ﬁeld extensions of Qp
that contain K.L e t n′′
0 be the transcendence degree over K of the function ﬁeld of XK.
Let n0
def
= n′
0 +2 (n′′
0 − 1) + 1.
Let n ≥ 3n0 +5 . Then every continuous open homomorphism
θ:Π n
XK → Πn
YK
over ΓK induces a dominant morphism μ : XK → YK whose induced morphism on
fundamental groups coincides (up to composition with an inner automorphism arising
from Δ YK ) with the morphism Δ n−3−3n0
XK
→ Δ n−3−3n0
YK
deﬁned by considering θ “mod-
ulo Δ {n − 3 − 3n0}.”
Proof. The reason for the inclusion of the extra “3 n0” (i.e., a “price” of three steps for
every additional transcendence degree that is used, plus an extra “tax” of three steps for
allowing the preﬁx “pro”) is the following: in order to reduce to the situation discussed
in the proof of Theorem 18.1, we need to show (in the present “pro” context) that inertia
groups are annihilated. Moreover, to apply the ﬁrst “inertia annihilation argument” (at
the beginning of Section 14), we needed to know that after one passes to some covering
Y
′
K → YK arising from an open subgroup of Π n−3
YK
(i.e., we wish to apply the arguments
of Theorem 18.1 for n − 3), one knows “preservation of relations” for Y ′
K. Thus, already
one needs some extra padding – to the tune of three steps (necessary, as we saw in the
ﬁrst two paragraphs of the proof of Theorem 18.1, to derive “preservations of relations”
for Y
′
K). (This accounts for the 1 in the deﬁnition of n0.) Moreover, each time one adds a
transcendence degree, one needs to apply the “inertia annihilation argument” of the ﬁrst
half of Section 15. Thus, by the same line of reasoning, one needs extra padding consisting
of three steps. (This accounts for then
′
0 in the deﬁnition of n0.) In Section 16, one uses not
only the transcendence degrees inherent in K, but also 2(n′′
0 − 1) auxiliary transcendence
degrees – here the “2 = 1 + 1” comes from the transcendence degree of “ K′”o v e r“K,”
plus the transcendence degree of the pencil “ ξ.” (This accounts for the 2( n′′
0 − 1) in the
deﬁnition of n0.) Finally, we remark that although in Sections 14, 15, and 16, we assumed
that the morphism of fundamental groups “ θ”w a ssurjective, it is easy to see that this
assumption is merely cosmetic, i.e., is inessential and serves only to simplify the discussion.
This completes the proof of the Theorem. ⃝
Remark. Thus, the essential diﬀerence between Theorems 18.1 and 18.2 is that in Theo-
rem 18.2, we allow “ pro-objects,” at the cost of having to apply “annihilation of inertia”
arguments, which require us to use larger quotients of ΔXK ,Δ YK (i.e., each application of
annihilation of inertia costs three units of “ n”).
Remark. We do not mean to pretend that the estimates in the above two Theorems (e.g.,
the “5’s,” “n0,” etc.) are the best possible. Especially if one is willing to add hypotheses
90

to YK, it should not be so diﬃcult to improve these estimates. The point of the above two
Theorems is simply to illustrate the principle involved.
We conclude this Section with two technical lemmas that were used in the proofs of
the above two Theorems.
Lemma 18.3. Let XK be a proper hyperbolic curve over a ﬁeldK of characteristic zero.
Let Δ X be (as usual) the maximal pro-p quotient of its geometric fundamental group. Let
ΞX
def
=Δ X/[Δ X,[Δ X,Δ X]]. Then the natural morphism
H2(ΞX, Zp(1))ΓK → H2(Δ X, Zp(1))ΓK
(induced by the quotient map Δ X → ΞX) is surjective. Here, the superscripted “ ΓK”
denotes “the submodule of ΓK-invariants.”
Proof. Let us ﬁrst consider the morphism
H2(ΞX , Zp(1)) → H2(Δ X, Zp(1))
To do this, we shall use the Hochschild-Serre spectral sequence for the quotient ΞX → HX
(where, as usual, we writeHX for the abelianization of ΔX). Write ΨX ⊆ ΞX for the kernel
of ΞX → HX.T h u s , ΨX may be identiﬁed with a certain well-understood (cf. Lemma
3.1) quotient of ∧2 HX . Consideration of the E··
2 -term of this spectral sequence shows
that there is a natural Γ K-equivariant injection of the cokernel of the natural morphism
(induced by the quotient ∧2 HX → ΨX)
H1(ΨX, Zp(1)) = HomZp (ΨX, Zp(1)) → H2(HX , Zp(1)) = HomZp (∧2HX, Zp(1))
into H2(ΞX, Zp(1)). (In other words, the above morphism is the diﬀerential (fromE0,1
2 to
E2,0
2 )o ft h e“ Epq
2 = Hp(HX ,H q(ΨX, Zp(1)))”-term of the spectral sequence.) Moreover,
it follows from Lemma 3.1 that the cokernel of this natural morphism is precisely the
quotient of H2(HX, Zp(1)) = (∧2 H1(HX, Zp))(1) given by the (surjective) cup-product
map (∧2 H1(HX , Zp))(1) → H2(Δ X, Zp)(1). Thus, in summary, we have a ΓK-equivariant
diagram:
H2(ΞX , Zp(1)) ⊇ Image(H2(HX , Zp(1))) → H2(Δ X, Zp(1))
in which the arrow is bijective. This implies the assertion stated in the Lemma. ⃝
91

Lemma 18.4. Let K, XK, Δ X,a n dΞX be as in Lemma 18.3. Since the kernel of
Δ X → ΞX is a normal subgroup not only ofΔ X, but also of ΠXK , write ΠXK → ΠΞ
XK for
the quotient of ΠXK by this subgroup. Then the natural morphisms
H2(ΠΞ
XK , Zp(1)) → H2(ΠXK , Zp(1))
and
H2(ΠXK ×ΓK ΠΞ
XK , Zp(1)) → H2(ΠXK ×ΓK ΠXK =Π XK ×K XK , Zp(1))
are surjective. In particular, if η ∈ H2(ΠXK ×KXK , Zp(1)) denotes the ﬁrst Chern class of
the diagonal in XK ×K XK,t h e nη lies in the image of H2(ΠXK ×ΓK ΠΞ
XK , Zp(1)).
Proof. The assertions of this Lemma follow by considering the consequences of the sur-
jectivity assertion of Lemma 18.3 for the Hochschild-Serre spectral sequences associated
to Π
Ξ
XK → ΓK;Π XK → ΓK;Π XK ×ΓK ΠΞ
XK → ΓK;a n dΠXK ×ΓK ΠXK → ΓK. ⃝
Section 19: Injectivity Result
In this Section, we prove the following “pro-p injectivity part of the so-called Section
Conjecture”:
Theorem 19.1. Let K be sub-p-adic (cf. Deﬁnition 15.4 (i)). Let XK be a hyperbolic
curve over K.L e t XK(K) be the set of K-valued points of XK.L e t Sect(ΓK,ΠXK ) be
the set of sections ΓK → ΠXK of ΠXK → ΓK, considered up to composition with an inner
automorphism arising from Δ XK . Then the natural map
XK(K) → Sect(ΓK,ΠXK )
is injective.
Remark. The so-called “Section Conjecture” states that (for instance whenXK is proper)
the natural map in Theorem 19.1 is bijective.( W h e nXK is aﬃne, the statement must be
modiﬁed slightly.) At the time of writing (July 1996), the Section Conjecture has not yet
been proven.
Proof. (of Theorem 19.1) Let H
X be the abelianization of Δ X. First, note that by
replacing XK by some ﬁnite Galois ´etale covering of XK of p-power order, we may assume
92

that the compactiﬁcation
 XK of XK is itself hyperbolic and non-hyperelliptic. Let r be
the number of points in (
 XK − XK)(
K). Let ZX be the complement of the diagonal in
XK ×K XK. By taking the second projection ZX → XK, we may regard ZX as a family
(parametrized by XK) of smooth hyperbolic curves obtained by removing r + 1 distinct
points from some compactiﬁcation.
Let ηX be the generic point of XK.L e t
ηX be the spectrum of some algebraic closure
of K(ηX). Let Z
ηX
def
= ZX ×X
 ηX. Then (since ZX → XK is a family of smooth hyperbolic
curves obtained by removing precisely r + 1 distinct points from some compactiﬁcation)
we obtain an exterior Galois representation
ρZ :Π prf
XK
→ Out(Δ Z
ηX
)
Now I claim that ρZ factors through ΠXK . Indeed, to see this, note that if HZ
ηX
is the
abelianization of Δ Z
ηX
,t h e ns i n c eΔZ
ηX
is a pro-p group, the kernel of
Ξ:O u t ( ΔZ
ηX
) → Aut(HZ
η X
)
is itself a pro-p group. Thus, it suﬃces to show that Ξ◦ρZ maps Δprf
X into a pro-p subgroup
of Aut(HZ
ηX
). But now observe that one has a Galois-equivariant surjectionHZ
ηX
→ HX
whose kernel is either 0 or Zp(1) (depending on whether r =0o r r> 0). Moreover,
the actions of Δ prf
X on HX and Zp(1) are trivial. Thus, it follows immediately that the
Δprf
X -action on HZ
ηX
is by unipotent matrices, so Ξ◦ρZ maps Δprf
X into a pro-p subgroup
of Aut(MZ ), as desired. This completes the proof of the claim.
Thus, we have a representation
ρZ :Π XK → Out(Δ Z
ηX
)
Now suppose that we have two points α, β ∈ XK(K) that induce the same element φ ∈
Sect(ΓK,ΠXK ). Let Zα (respectively, Zβ) be the pull-back ofZX → X via α (respectively,
β). Thus, Zα and Zβ are hyperbolic curves over K. Moreover, since the action of ΓK on
Δ Zα (respectively, ΔZβ ) is determined by composingφ with ρZ, it follows that there exists
some isomorphism ψ :Δ Zα
∼= Δ Zβ such that (i) ψ is compatible with the respective outer
ΓK-actions; (ii) ψ preserves and induces the identity between the quotients Δ Zα → HX,
Δ Zβ → HX. Thus, by Theorem 16.5 (in fact, really, all we need is TheoremA of [Mzk2]),
it follows that ψ arises from some isomorphism Zα ∼= Zβ which is compatible with and
induces the identity on the inclusionsZα ↪→ XK, Zβ ↪→ XK. But this clearly implies that
α = β, thus completing the proof of the Theorem. ⃝
Remark. Note that in fact, in the proof of Theorem 19.1, we really only used the weaker
results of [Mzk2] – i.e., we did not need to use Theorem A of the present paper. On the
93

other hand, at the time that [Mzk2] was written, the author was unaware of Theorem 19.1,
which is the primary reason that Theorem 19.1 did not appear in [Mzk2]. Note also that
although Theorem 19.1 implies a corresponding proﬁnite result, the proﬁnite result can
be proven much more easily, by using the “Kummer exact sequence” for the Jacobian of
X
K. Finally, it should be remarked that the argument employed in the proof of Theorem
19.1 (as well as the Kummer sequence argument just mentioned) have been well-known
for some time (see, e.g., [Naka2]). The main reason that Theorem 19.1 was included in
this paper was that the author just wanted to make explicit that apro-p injectivity result
(such as Theorem 19.1) could now be proven.
APPENDIX: A Grothendieck Conjecture-Type Result for
Certain Hyperbolic Surfaces
Section a0: Introduction
In this Appendix, we show how Theorem A (cf. the Introduction) can be used to
prove a Grothendieck Conjecture-type result for certain types of surfaces. The surfaces
considered are families of (smooth) hyperbolic curves that are parametrized by hyperbolic
curves (cf. Deﬁnition a2.1). We call such surfaces hyperbolically ﬁbred. Our notation is
similar to that of the rest of the paper, except that since here we consider only proﬁnite
(i.e., not pro-p) fundamental groups, in this Appendix, we will write Π
XK for the proﬁnite
fundamental group of XK:
Notation:I f K is a ﬁeld and XK is a K-scheme, we denote by Π XK
def
= π1(XK)t h e
fundamental group of XK (for some choice of base-point), and by ΓK the absolute Galois
group of K. Then we have a natural morphism Π XK → ΓK whose kernel Δ X ⊆ ΠXK is
the geometric fundamental group π1(XK ⊗K
 K)( w h e r e
K is an algebraic closure of K).
Our main theorem is the following:
Theorem D. Let K be sub-p-adic (cf. Deﬁnition 15.4 (i)). Let XK and YK be
hyperbolically ﬁbred surfaces over K.L e t IsomK(XK,YK) be the set of K-isomorphisms
(in the category ofK-schemes) between XK and YK.L e tIsomΓK (ΠXK ,ΠYK ) be the set of
continuous group isomorphisms ΠXK → ΠYK over ΓK, considered up to composition with
an inner automorphism arising from Δ Y . Then the natural map
IsomK(XK,YK) → IsomΓK (ΠXK ,ΠYK )
94

is bijective.
This Theorem is given as Theorem a2.4 in the text.
We remark that:
(1) Theorem D above is (modulo a certain technical result – Lemma a1.1)
essentially derived from TheoremA. Note that one needs the full power
of the “Hom version” of the Grothendieck Conjecture for hyperbolic
curves (i.e., Theorem A) in order to prove an “Isom-type result” for
surfaces (i.e., Theorem D above). That is to say, the “Isom version”
of Theorem A of the present paper – i.e., Theorem A of [Mzk2] – is
not suﬃcient to prove Theorem D above. Moreover, even with the
“Hom version” of the Grothendieck Conjecture for hyperbolic curves
(i.e., Theorem A), at the present time, I am unable to prove a “Hom
version” of TheoremD.
(2) One might ask whether Theorem D can be extended to hyperbolically
ﬁbered varieties (i.e., varieties obtained as successive ﬁbrations of hy-
perbolic curves) of higher dimension. The problem is that just as we
needed (see Remark (1)) the “Hom version” in dimension one to prove
an “Isom-type result” in dimension two, we would need a “Hom-type
result” in dimension two – which is currently not available –i no r d e r
to prove an “Isom-type result” in, say, dimension three. Thus, at the
present time, we are unable to advance beyond dimension two.
(3) Since TheoremA is valid in the pro-p case as well, one might ask why one
cannot prove a pro-p version of Theorem D above. The problem is that
the process of passing to the maximal pro-p quotient is not well-behaved
with respect to ﬁbrations. That is to say, if X
K → X′
K is a family of
hyperbolic curves parametrized by a hyperbolic curve (as in Deﬁnition
a2.1), then the maximal pro- p quotient of the fundamental group of
the geometric generic ﬁber of X
K → X′
K does not map injectively (in
general) to the maximal pro- p quotient of Δ X. Thus, any attempt to
prove a pro-p version of TheoremD by means of the techniques employed
here would result in a rather unnatural theorem.
(4) Since Theorem A admits various truncated versions (cf. the Introduc-
tion) as well, one might ask why one cannot prove a truncated version
of Theorem D. The problem here is the same as the problem that arises
when one tries to prove a pro-p result: i.e., truncating is not well-behaved
with respect to ﬁbrations.
(5) To a slight extent, the content of TheoremD above overlaps with recent
results of H. Nakamura and N. Takao (see TheoremA and Corollary B
of [NT]).
95

Section a1: A Key Lemma
In this Section, we prove a simple technical lemma which will be the key technical
ingredient that allows us to extend Theorem A to the case of surfaces. Let K be an
algebraically closed ﬁeld of characteristic zero. Let X and Y be hyperbolic curves over K
(cf. Section 0 for a deﬁnition of this term).
Lemma a1.1. Let φ : X → Y be a ﬁnite K-morphism. Let ψ :Π XK → ΠYK be the
induced morphism on fundamental groups. Suppose that Ker(ψ) is topologically ﬁnitely
generated. Then φ is ´etale.
Proof. By replacing Y by the ﬁnite ´etale covering of Y corresponding to Im(ψ) ⊆ ΠYK ,
we may assume that ψ is surjective. Under this assumption, φ is ´etale if and only if φ is
an isomorphism. Thus, it suﬃces to assume that:
(1) Ker(φ) is topologically ﬁnitely generated; and
(2) φ is not an isomorphism (hence has degree > 1)
and derive a contradiction.
Let Y ′ → Y be a ﬁnite ´etale covering Y ,w h e r eY ′ is connected. Let X′ def
= X ×Y Y ′.
Then X′ → X is ﬁnite ´etale, and it follows from the assumption that ψ is surjective that
X′ is connected. Since Y is hyperbolic, it follows that for a suitable choice of Y ′ → Y , Y ′
will have genus ≥ 2. Thus, by replacing our original X → Y by X′ → Y ′, we may assume
that X′ and Y ′ have genus ≥ 2.
Since X → Y is assumed to have degree > 1, it follows that gX (the genus of X)
is strictly greater than gY (the genus of Y ). Let Y ′ → Y be a ﬁnite ´etale covering of
degree d such that Y ′ is connected, and Y ′ → Y extends to an ´etale covering over some
compactiﬁcation of Y . Then the Riemann-Hurwitz formula implies that, asY ′ → Y varies,
gY ′ (which we think of as a function of d)i se q u a lt od(gY − 1) + 1. On the other hand,
if X′ def
= X ×Y Y ′, then (again by the Riemann-Hurwitz formula) gX′ = d(gX − 1) + 1.
Thus, it follows that as d →∞ , the diﬀerence gX′ − gY ′ →∞ .
Now let HX′ denote the ﬁrst homology group of the compactiﬁcation of X′ with
coeﬃcients in Zp (for some prime numberp which will be ﬁxed throughout the discussion).
Then ψ induces a surjection H′
ψ : HX′ → HY ′ .T h u s ,K e r (H′
ψ )i saf r e eZp-module of rank
2(gX′ − gY ′ ). On the other hand, any topological generators of Ker( ψ) clearly deﬁne
a set of Zp-generators of Ker(H′
ψ ). But this implies that rank Zp (Ker(H′
ψ )) is bounded,
independently of Y ′ → Y , which contradicts the fact that rank Zp (Ker(H′
ψ )) = 2( gX′ −
gY ′ ) →∞ as d →∞ . This contradiction completes the proof. ⃝
96

Section a2: The Main Theorem
Let K be a ﬁeld of characteristic zero. Let XK be a surface over K,b yw h i c hw e
mean that XK is a smooth (geometrically connected) variety over K of dimension two.
Deﬁnition a2.1. We shall say thatXK is a hyperbolically ﬁbred surface if the following
condition holds: There exists a hyperbolic curve X′
K over K, together with a smooth,
proper, connected morphism
 XK → X′
K of relative dimension one such that XK embeds
as an open subvariety of
XK satisfying the following conditions: (i)
 XK − XK is a divisor
in
 XK which is ´etale overX′
K; (ii) the geometric ﬁbers of XK ⊆
 XK → X′
K are hyperbolic
curves.
If XK is a hyperbolically ﬁbred surface, then we shall refer to XK → X′
K (as above)
as a parametrizing morphism for XK.
Note that given a hyperbolically ﬁbered surface XK, in general, there can exist more than
one parametrizing morphism for XK.I f XK → X′
K is a parametrizing morphism for
XK,a n dFΩ ⊆ XK is a ﬁber of this morphism (over some point of XK(Ω) valued in an
algebraically closed ﬁeld Ω), then we have an exact sequence of fundamental groups:
1 → ΠFΩ → ΠXK → ΠX′
K
→ 1
Note that since FΩ and X′
K are hyperbolic curves, it follows that Π FΩ and ΠX′
K
(hence
also ΠXK )a r etopologically ﬁnitely generated.
Now let K be sub-p-adic (cf. Deﬁnition 15.4 (i)) (for some prime number p), and let
XK and YK be hyperbolically ﬁbred surfaces over K.L e t
φ :Π XK → ΠYK
be a continuous group isomorphismover ΓK. We would like to show thatφ arises geomet-
rically.
Let ζY : YK → Y ′
K be a parametrizing morphism for YK. Then by composing φ
with π1(ζY ), we obtain a continuous surjection Π XK → ΠY ′
K
.B y T h e o r e mA, it follows
that this surjection arises geometrically, from some morphism XK → Y ′
K.T h u s , w e m a y
regard XK and YK as objects over Y ′
K.L e tZK be the normalization of Y ′
K in XK.T h u s ,
the morphism XK → Y ′
K factors through δ : ZK → Y ′
K. Observe that ZK is a smooth,
geometrically connected (since XK is geometrically connected over K)c u r v eo v e rK,a n d
that ZK → Y ′
K is ﬁnite. (In particular, since Y ′
K is hyperbolic, it follows that ZK is also
hyperbolic.) Moreover, it follows from the deﬁnition of ZK that the morphism Π XK →
ΠZK induced by XK → ZK is surjective. This implies that Ker( π(δ)) is a quotient of
Ker(ΠXK → ΠY ′
K
) ∼= Ker(ΠYK → ΠY ′
K
), which (by the deﬁnition of a hyperbolically ﬁbred
97

surface) is topologically ﬁnitely generated. Thus, it follows that Ker( π(δ)) is topologically
ﬁnitely generated. But then Lemma a1.1 implies that ZK → Y ′
K is ´etale. On the other
hand, since ΠXK → ΠY ′
K
is surjective, we thus see thatZK → Y ′
K must be anisomorphism.
In particular, we thus conclude that the generic ﬁber ofXK → Y ′
K is smooth, geometrically
connected, and of dimension one.
In fact, the argument of the preceding paragraph can be applied more generally to
coverings of XK, as follows: Let ˜Y ′
K → Y ′
K be a ﬁnite ´etale covering such that ˜Y ′
K is
geometrically connected overK.L e t ˜YK → YK ×Y ′
K
˜Y ′
K be a ﬁnite ´etale covering such that
˜YK → ˜Y ′
K is geometrically connected. Let ˜XK → XK be the covering corresponding (via
φ)t o ˜YK → YK.T h u s ,˜XK → XK factors through ˜XK → XK ×Y ′
K
˜Y ′
K.T h e nI claim that
˜XK → ˜Y ′
K is geometrically connected. Indeed, this follows by the same argument as that
employed in the preceding paragraph: Namely, we simply observe that Π ˜XK
→ Π ˜Y ′
K
is
isomorphic to Π˜YK
→ Π ˜Y ′
K
, which is surjective with topologically ﬁnitely generated kernel.
This proves the claim. Let L be the function ﬁeld of Y ′
K;l e t
L be its algebraic closure.
Note that the natural map Spec(
L) → Y ′
K factors through ˜Y ′
K. Moreover, the above claim
implies that if we base-change ˜XK → ˜Y ′
K via Spec(
L) → ˜Y ′
K, the resulting ˜XK ×˜Y ′
K
Spec(
L)
is connected.
Now let us reinterpret the conclusions of the preceding paragraph in terms of funda-
mental groups. Let ηY ′ be the generic point of Y ′
K.L e t YηY ′
def
= YK ×Y ′
K
ηY ′ ; XηY ′
def
=
XK ×Y ′
K
ηY ′ . Then what we did in the preceding paragraph implies precisely that the
morphism
Ker(π1(XηY ′ ) → π1(ηY ′ )) → Ker(π1(YηY ′ ) → π1(ηY ′)) = Ker(ΠYK → ΠY ′
K
)
(induced by φ)i s surjective. Thus, we see that by composing the natural surjection of
π1(XηY ′ )o n t oΠXK with φ, we obtain a continuous surjective group homomorphism
φηY ′ :Π XηY ′
→ ΠYηY ′
over ΓηY ′ (where we regard XηY ′ and YηY ′ as curves over ηY ′ ). Now we would like to
apply Theorem A again. This Theorem tells us that φηY ′ arises geometrically from some
ηY ′ -morphism XηY ′ → YηY ′ .
Remark. Note that in the argument of the preceding three paragraphs, it was absolutely
essential to invoke Lemma a1.1 before we could apply Theorem A. In fact, if the variety
“on the left” (i.e., in this case, XηY ′ ) is not geometrically connected over the base ﬁeld
(i.e., in this case,
 L), then it is not diﬃcult to see that Theorem A does not hold. Indeed,
to construct such a counterexample, suppose that YK is proper,a n dl e tHK ⊆ YK be a
98

hyperplane section (with respect to some projective embedding of YK) such that HK is
smooth and geometrically connected over K,a n dπ1(HK) → π1(YK)i s surjective. (Such
an HK exists by the Lefshetz hyperplane theorem.) Write ηH for the generic point of
HK, and take for our “ XηY ′ ” any hyperbolic curve over ηH. Then note that (if HK is
suﬃciently generic so that every ﬁber of HK → Y ′
K contains at least one point at which
HK → Y ′
K is ´etale, then) the induced morphismπ1(ηH) → π1(YηY ′ )i sa l s osurjective,s ow e
get a surjective morphismπ1(XηY ′ ) → π1(YηY ′ ) (by composing the (necessarily surjective)
structure morphism π1(XηY ′ ) → π1(ηH)w i t hπ1(ηH) → π1(YηY ′ )). But this surjective
morphism does not arise from a dominant morphism XηY ′ → YηY ′ .
This completes the portion of the proof which is an application of (the nontrivial, sur-
jectivity part of) TheoremA. The remainder of the proof will consists of using elementary
algebraic geometry to show that the morphismXηY ′ → YηY ′ constructed above extends to
a morphism XK → YK.
Lemma a2.2. The morphism XηY ′ → YηY ′ above extends to a morphism XK → YK.
Proof. First, observe that there exists a ﬁnite ´etale covering VK → YK with the following
properties:
(1) VK is a hyperbolically ﬁbered surface that admits a parametrizing mor-
phism VK → V ′
K that ﬁts into a commutative diagram:
VK −→ V ′
K
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
Y
K −→ Y ′
K
(2) The ﬁbers of VK → V ′
K have genus ≥ 2.
Let UK → XK be the ﬁnite ´etale covering that corresponds (via φ)t o VK → YK.L e t
V K → V ′
K be the family of proper hyperbolic curves that compactiﬁes VK → V ′
K (as in
Deﬁnition a2.1). Write ηV ′ for the generic point ofV ′
K. Note that there exists a natural map
UK → V ′
K covering XK → Y ′
K, and that bothUK and VK are geometrically connected over
ηV ′ (cf. the argument used above to show that ˜XK → ˜Y ′
K is geometrically connected).
Thus, we may form (geometrically connected) ηV ′ -curves UηV ′ , VηV ′ . Moreover, by the
deﬁnition of UK, we have a commutative diagram
UηV ′ −→ VηV ′ −→
 V ηV ′
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
XηY ′ −→ YηY ′
99

Thus, in particular, we obtain a morphism UηV ′ →
 V ηV ′ (over ηV ′ ). I claim that this
morphism extends to a morphismUK →
 V K. Indeed, by the elementary theory of surfaces
– “elimination of indeterminacy” (see, e.g., Theorem 5.5 of Chapter V of [Harts]) – it follows
that there exists some ˜UK → UK (obtained by successively blowing up smooth points) such
that the birational transformation from UK to
 V K deﬁned by UηV ′ →
 V ηV ′ extends to a
morphism ˜UK →
 V K. On the other hand, any exceptional curve in ˜UK necessarily maps
into a ﬁber of
 V K → V ′
K (this follows since UK → V ′
K is already a morphism). Thus, any
exceptional P1 in ˜UK maps quasi-ﬁnitely into a ﬁber of
 V K → V ′
K (which will always be a
smooth, proper, hyperbolic curve) – which is clearly absurd. This contradiction completes
the proof of the claim.
Thus, we have a morphism U
K →
 V K.L e t
 Y K → Y ′
K compactify YK → Y ′
K (as in
Deﬁnition a2.1). Then clearly VK → YK extends to a ﬁnite (in general, ramiﬁed) morphism
V K →
 Y K. Thus, to summarize, we have a rational map fromXK to
 Y K which is covered
by a morphism UK →
 V K,w h e r eUK (respectively,
 V K) is ﬁnite over XK (respectively,
Y K). By elementary algebraic geometry, this implies that we get a morphism XK →
 Y K
(covered by UK →
 V K).
To complete the proof of the Lemma, we must verify that this morphism XK →
 Y K
factors through YK. To do this, we simply choose VK → YK in the above argument
such that VK is ramiﬁed, with very large (say, compared to the degree of XK →
 Y K)
ramiﬁcation index, over all of the divisor
 Y K − YK. (Note that such coverings exist, by
the exact sequence of fundamental groups following Deﬁnition a2.1, plus the well-known
fact from topology that the fundamental group of a compact surface with ﬁnitely many
punctures has coverings with arbitrarily large ramiﬁcation index at those punctures.) Then
since X
K →
 Y K is covered by UK →
 V K,a n dUK → XK is ﬁnite ´etale, we see that we
obtain a contradiction, unless XK →
 Y K maps into YK. Thus, we conclude that we have
a morphism XK → YK, as desired. ⃝
Let us summarize what we have done so far. We started with a continuous group
isomorphism
φ :Π XK → ΠYK
over ΓK.F r o mφ, we constructed a K-morphism XK → YK, which we denote byα.S i n c e
φ is invertible, we thus see that we have also constructed a K-morphism β : YK → XK
from φ−1. Since everything we have been doing is functorial, it follows that π1(β ◦α)
is the identity on Π XK (up to composition with an inner automorphism arising from an
element of Δ X). Thus, by Lemma a2.3 below, we conclude that β ◦α is the identity on
XK. Similarly, α ◦β is the identity on YK.
Lemma a2.3. Let γ : XK → XK be a K-morphism such that π1(γ) is the identity
on ΠXK (up to composition with an inner automorphism arising from an element ofΔ X).
Then γ is the identity.
100

Proof. First observe thatπ1(γ) is trivially compatible (up to composition with a geometric
inner automorphism) with the map induced by π1’s by XK → X′
K. Thus, (the injectivity
part of) Theorem A tells us that γ is compatible with XK → X′
K.L e t ηX′ be the
generic point of X′
K.T h e nγ deﬁnes a morphism γηX′ : XηX′ → XηX′ which induces the
identity (up to composition with a geometric inner automorphism) onπ1’s. Applying (the
injectivity part of) TheoremA again then tells us thatγηX′ is the identity. Thus, it follows
that γ is the identity, as desired. ⃝
Thus, α and β are isomorphisms. Moreover, it follows from the construction of α that
π1(α)c o i n c i d e sw i t hφ (up to composition with an inner automorphism arising from an
element of ΔY ), and it follows from Lemma a2.3 thatα is the unique such K-isomorphism
XK ∼= YK. Thus, we see that we see that we have proven the following result:
Theorem a2.4. Let K be sub-p-adic (cf. Deﬁnition 15.4 (i)). Let XK and YK be
hyperbolically ﬁbred surfaces over K.L e t IsomK(XK,YK) be the set of K-isomorphisms
(in the category ofK-schemes) between XK and YK.L e tIsomΓK (ΠXK ,ΠYK ) be the set of
continuous group isomorphisms ΠXK → ΠYK over ΓK, considered up to composition with
an inner automorphism arising from Δ Y . Then the natural map
IsomK(XK,YK) → IsomΓK (ΠXK ,ΠYK )
is bijective.
Bibliography
[AV] D. Mumford, Abelian Varieties, Oxford Univ. Press (1974).
[BK] S. Bloch and K. Kato, L-Functions and Tamagawa Numbers in The Grothendieck
Festschrift, Volume I, Birkh¨auser (1990), pp. 333-400.
[Del] P. Deligne, Le Groupe Fondamental de la Droite Projective Moins Trois Points in
Galois Groups over Q ed. by Y. Ihara, K. Ribet, J.-P. Serre, Springer Verlag (1989),
pp. 79-297.
[DM] P. Deligne and D. Mumford,The Irreducibility of the Moduli Space of Curves of Given
Genus, IHES Publ. Math. 36 (1969), pp. 75-109.
[Falt1] G. Faltings, p-adic Hodge Theory, Journal of the Amer. Math. Soc. 1, No. 1 (1988),
pp. 255-299.
[Falt2] G. Faltings, Crystalline Cohomology and p-adic Galois Representations, Proceedings
of the First JAMI Conference , Johns-Hopkins University Press (1990), pp. 25-79.
101

[Falt3] G. Faltings, Endlichkeitss¨atze f¨ur Abelschen Variet¨aten ¨uber Zahlk¨orpern, Inv. Math.
73 (1983), pp. 349-366.
[FC] G. Faltings and C.-L. Chai,Degenerations of Abelian Varieties, Springer Verlag (1990).
[Fo] J. M. Fontaine, Formes diﬀerentielles et modules de Tate des vari´et´es ab´eliennes sur
les corps locaux, Inv. Math. 65 (1982), pp. 379-409.
[Groth] A. Grothendieck, letter to G. Faltings (June 1983) in Lochak, L. Schneps, Geometric
Galois Actions; 1. Around Grothendieck’s Esquisse d’un Programme, London Math.
Soc. Lect. Note Ser. 242, Cambridge Univ. Press (1997).
[Harts] R. Hartshorne, Algebraic Geometry, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 52, Springer
Verlag (1977).
[Hiro] H. Hironaka, Resolution of Singularities of an Algebraic Variety over a ﬁeld of Char-
acteristic Zero, Ann. Math. 79 (1964), pp. 109-203; 205-326.
[Hyodo] O. Hyodo, On variation of Hodge-Tate structures, Math. Ann. 284 (1989), pp. 7-22.
[IN] Y. Ihara and H. Nakamura, Some illustrative examples for anabelian geometry in high
dimensions in Lochak, L. Schneps,Geometric Galois Actions; 1. Around Grothendieck’s
Esquisse d’un Programme, London Math. Soc. Lect. Note Ser. 242, Cambridge Univ.
Press (1997), pp. 127-138.
[Jou] J.-P. Jouanolou, Th´eor`emes de Bertini et Applications, Progress in Mathematics 42,
Birkh¨auser (1983).
[Kato] K. Kato, Logarithmic Structures of Fontaine-Illusie, Proceedings of the First JAMI
Conference, Johns-Hopkins University Press (1990), pp. 191-224.
[Knud] F. F. Knudsen,The Projectivity of the Moduli Space of Stable Curves, II, Math. Scand.
52 (1983), pp. 161-199.
[Kobl] N. Koblitz, p-adic Numbers, p-adic Analysis, and Zeta Functions, Graduate Texts in
Mathematics 58, Springer Verlag (1977).
[Lang] S. Lang, Abelian Varieties, Springer Verlag (1983).
[Mats] H. Matsumura, Commutative Algebra (Second Edition) , The Benjamin/Cummings
Publishing Company (1980).
[MB] L. Moret-Bailly, Expos´eI Ii nS´eminaire sur les Pinceaux Arithm´etiques: La Conjecture
de Mordell,e d i t e db yL .S z p i r o ,Ast´erisque 127 (1985).
[Mzk1] S. Mochizuki, The Proﬁnite Grothendieck Conjecture for Closed Hyperbolic Curves
over Number Fields, J. Math. Sci., Univ. Tokyo 3 (1996), pp. 571-627.
[Mzk2] S. Mochizuki, The Local Pro-p Grothendieck Conjecture for Hyperbolic Curves, RIMS,
Kyoto University, Preprint 1045 (1995).
[Mzk3] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of the Compactiﬁcation of the Hurwitz Scheme, Publ. of
RIMS 31, No. 3 (1995), pp. 355-441.
102

[Naka1] H. Nakamura, Galois Rigidity of the ´Etale Fundamental Groups of Punctured Projec-
tive Line, J. reine angew. Math. 411 (1990), pp. 205-216.
[Naka2] H. Nakamura, Galois Rigidity of Algebraic Mappings into some Hyperbolic Varieties,
Intern. J. Math. 4 (1993), pp. 421-438.
[Naka3] H. Nakamura, On the Exterior Galois Representations Associated with Open Elliptic
Curves, J. Math. Sci., Univ. Tokyo 2 (1995), pp. 197-231.
[NT] H. Nakamura and N. Takao, Galois Rigidity of pro-l Pure Braid Groups of Algebraic
Curves, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 350 (1998), pp. 1079-1102.
[NTs] H. Nakamura and H. Tsunogai, Some ﬁniteness theorems on Galois centralizers in
pro-l mapping class groups, J. reine angew. Math. 441 (1993), pp. 115-144.
[Pop1] F. Pop, Grothendieck’s Conjecture of Birational Anabelian Geometry, Ann. of Math.
138 (1994), pp. 145-182.
[Pop2] F. Pop, Grothendieck’s Conjecture of Birational Anabelian Geometry II,P r e p r i n tS e -
ries Arithmetik II, No. 16, Heidelberg (1995).
[Pop3] F. Pop, oral communication to the author (July-August 1996).
[Ser1] J.-P. Serre, Groupes Alg´ebriques et Corps de Classes, Hermann, Paris (1959).
[Ser2] J.-P. Serre, Local Fields, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 67, Springer Verlag (1979).
[SGA2] A. Grothendieck et al., Cohomologie Locale des Faisceaux Coh´erents et Th´eor`emes de
Lefshetz Locaux et Globaux, North-Holland, Amsterdam (1968).
[SGA4] A. Grothendieck et al., Th´eorie des Topos et Cohomologie ´Etale, Lecture Notes in
Mathematics 264, 270, 305, Springer Verlag (1972-3).
[Sha] S. S. Shatz, Proﬁnite Groups, Arithmetic, and Geometry, Annals of Math. Studies 67,
Princeton University Press (1972).
[Shiho] A. Shiho, manuscript in preparation.
[Tama] A. Tamagawa,The Grothendieck Conjecture for Aﬃne Curves, Compositio Math. 109,
No. 2 (1997), pp. 135-194.
[Tate] J. Tate, p-Divisible Groups, Proceedings of a Conference on Local Fields, Driebergen,
Springer Verlag (1967), pp. 158-183.
103