The Galois-Theoretic
Kodaira-Spencer Morphism of an Elliptic Curve
Shinichi Mochizuki
July 2000
Contents:
§0. Introduction
§1. Galois Actions on the Torsion Points
§2. Lagrangian Galois Actions
§2.1. Deﬁnition and Construction
§2.2. Relation to the Crystalline Theta Object
§3. Global Multiplicative Subspaces
§4. The Group Tensor Product
Section 0: Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to study in greater detail thearithmetic Kodaira-
Spencer morphismof an elliptic curve introduced in [Mzk1], Chapter IX, in the gen-
eral context of the Hodge-Arakelov theory of elliptic curves, developed in [Mzk1-3].
In particular, after correcting a minor error (cf. Corollary 1.6) in the construction of
this arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism in [Mzk1], Chapter IX,§3, we deﬁne (cf.
§2.1) a slightly modiﬁed “Lagrangian”version of this arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer
morphism which has the following remarkable properties:
(1) This Lagrangian arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism is free
of Gaussian poles (cf. Corollary 2.5).
(2) A certain portion of the reduction modulo p of this Lagrangian
arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism may be naturally iden-
tiﬁed with the usual geometric Kodaira-Spencer morphism (cf.
Corollary 2.7).
We recall that property (1) is of substantial interest since it is the Gaussian poles
that are the main obstruction to applying the Hodge-Arakelov theory of elliptic
curves to diophantine geometry (cf. the discussion of [Mzk1], Introduction, §5.1,
for more details). On the other hand, property (2) is of substantial interest in that
Typeset by AMS-TEX
1

2 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
it shows quite deﬁnitively that the analogy asserted in [Mzk1], Chapter IX, between
the arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism of the Hodge-Arakelov theory of elliptic
curves and the usual geometric Kodaira-Spencer morphism of a family of elliptic
curves is not just philosophy, but rigorous mathematics! (cf. the Remark following
Corollary 2.7 for more details). In fact, both properties (1) and (2) are essentially
formal consequences of a property that we refer to as the “crystalline nature of
the Lagrangian Galois action”(cf. Theorem 2.4). Interestingly, the theory of §2o f
the present paper makes essential use not only of the theory of [Mzk1], but also of
[Mzk2], [Mzk3].
Unfortunately, however, this Lagrangian arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism,
which is based on a certain “Lagrangian Galois action,” can only be deﬁned when
there is a natural (rank one) multiplicative subspace (i.e., “weight 1” subspace) of
the Tate module of the elliptic curve in question. Since such a subspace is well-
known to exist in a formal neighborhood of inﬁnity (of the compactiﬁed moduli
stack of elliptic curves), we work over such a base in §2. Ultimately, however, one
would like to carry out this construction for elliptic curves over number ﬁelds .I n
§3, 4, we discuss a certain point of view that suggests that this may be possible
— cf. especially, §4, “Conclusion.” It is the hope of the author to complete the
construction motivated in §3,4 in a future paper.
Notation and Conventions:
We will denote by (
M
log
1,0)Z the log moduli stack of log elliptic curves over Z
(cf. [Mzk1], Chapter III, Deﬁnition 1.1), where the log structure is that deﬁned
by the divisor at inﬁnity. The open substack of (
M1,0)Z parametrizing (smooth)
elliptic curves will be denoted by (M1,0)Z ⊆ (M1,0)Z.
Acknowledgements: The author would like to thank A. Tamagawa and T. Tsuji for
stimulating discussions of the various topics presented in this manuscript.
Section 1: Galois Actions on the T orsion Points
In this §, we study various Galois actions on the space of functions on the set
of torsion points of an elliptic curve. In particular, we observe that these actions
give rise to a natural action of the “algebraic fundamental groupoid” of the base
of a family of elliptic curves on the scheme of torsion points over this base. This
action allows us to correct an error made in [Mzk1], Chapter IX, in the deﬁnition
given there of the arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism.
Let S
log be a ﬁne noetherian log scheme whose underlying scheme S is con-
nected and normal.W r i t eUS ⊆ S for the open subscheme where the log structure
is trivial. In the following discussion, we shall assume that US ̸= ∅.N e x t , l e t u s
assume that we are given a log elliptic curve (cf. §0, Notations and Conventions)
Clog → Slog

GALOIS-THEORETIC KODAIRA-SPENCER 3
(whose associated one-dimensional semi-abelian scheme we denote by E → S)a n d
a positive integer d ≥ 1w h i c hi sgenerically invertible on S (i.e., invertible on a
schematically dense open subscheme of S). Next, let us write
UT [d−1] ⊆ E|US[d− 1]
(where US[d−1]
def
= US ⊗Z Z[d−1]) for the kernel of the ﬁnite, ´etale morphism [d]:
E|US[d− 1] → E|US[d− 1] of degreed2 (given by multiplication byd). Thus, UT [d−1] →
US[d−1] is ﬁnite ´etale of degree d2.L e tu sw r i t e
T → S
for the normalization of S in UT [d−1], UT
def
= T |US (so UT [d−1]= UT ⊗Z Z[d−1]).
Also, let us assume that we are given a connected, normal scheme Z over S such
that if we write UZ
def
= Z|US , UZ[d−1]
def
= UZ ⊗Z Z[d−1], then UZ[d−1] → US[d−1]i s
ﬁnite ´etale and Galois; UZ[d−1] → US[d−1] dominates every connected component
of UT [d−1]; and Z is the normalization of S in UZ[d−1].
Next, we consider ´etale fundamental groups.W r i t e
ΠS
for the fundamental group π1(US[d−1]) (for some choice of base-point, which we
omit in the notation since it is irrelevant to our discussion). Then sinceUZ[d−1] →
US[d−1]i s Galois, it follows that Π S acts naturally on UZ[d−1], hence also on Z
(over S). In particular, Π S acts naturally on the module of d-torsion points
M
def
=M o rS(Z,T )
(where we observe that, as an abstract Z-module, M ∼= (Z/dZ)2). In the following
discussion, we shall think of the action of ΠS on Z as an action from the right,a n d
the action of ΠS on OZ, M as an action from the left.
Next, let us us consider the OZ-algebra
F
def
= Func(M, OZ)
of OZ-valued functions on the ﬁnite set M. Then observe that Π S acts on F in
several diﬀerent ways, e.g., via the action of ΠS on M, via the action of ΠS on OZ,
etc.
Deﬁnition 1.1. We shall refer to theOZ-linear (respectively, semi-linear, relative
to the action of Π S on OZ)a c t i o no fΠS from the right (respectively, left) on F
induced by the action of ΠS on M (respectively, OZ)a st h epoint-theoretic action

4 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(respectively, value-theoretic action)o fΠ S on F. We shall refer to the OZ-semi-
linear action of ΠS on F from the left given by composing the value-theoretic action
with the inverse of the point-theoretic action (i.e., if σ ∈ ΠS,a n dφ ∈F ,t h e nσ
maps φ to the function M ∋ m ↦→ σ(φ(σ−1m))) as the diagonal action of ΠS on
F. We shall abbreviate the term “point-theoretic action” (respectively, “value-
theoretic action”; “diagonal action”) by the termP-action (respectively, V-action;
D-action).
Proposition 1.2. There is a natural inclusion ι: OT ↪→F of OS-algebras which
induces an isomorphism of OT onto the subalgebra of F of ΠS-invariants with
respect to the D-action. Moreover, this inclusion induces an isomorphism
(OT ⊗OS OZ)norm ∼
→F
(where the superscript “norm” denotes the normalization of the ring in parentheses)
which is ΠS-equivariant with respect to the tensor product of the trivial action of
ΠS on OT and the natural action of ΠS on OZ on the left, and the D-action of
ΠS on F on the right.
Proof. It is a tautology (cf. the deﬁnition M
def
=M o rS(Z,T )) that elements of M
deﬁne OS-algebra homomorphisms OT →O Z. Thus, if we take the direct product
of these various homomorphisms, then we get an OS-algebra homomorphism
ι: OT →F
(cf. the deﬁnition of F — i.e., F
def
= Func(M, OZ)). Moreover, it is a tautology that
OT maps into the subalgebra of ΠS-invariants of F relative to the D-action. Since
OT and F are both normal algebras, in order to verify the remaining assertions
of Proposition 1.2, it suﬃces to verify that these assertions hold over US[d−1].
To simplify notation, we assume (just for the remainder of this proof) that S =
US[d−1].
Thus, T → S and Z → S are ﬁnite ´etale, so, by (Galois) ´etale descent (with
respect to the morphism Z → S), it follows that the Π S-invariants of F form
an OS-algebra OT ′ , whose spectrum T ′ over S is ﬁnite ´etale over S.M o r e o v e r ,
T ′ → S factors (cf. the discussion of the preceding paragraph) through T.T h u s ,
since T ′ and T are both ﬁnite ´etale of degree equal to the cardinality of M (i.e.,
d2)o v e rS, we obtain thatT ′ = T, as desired. The fact that the induced morphism
OT ⊗OS OZ
∼
→F is an isomorphism then follows from elementary properties of ´etale
descent. This completes the proof. ⃝
Next, we would like to use the V-action of Π S on F to construct “some sort
of group action” on F which descends to an action on OT . If, for instance, the
V-action of Π S on F were equivariant with respect to the D-action of Π S on F,
then the V-action itself would deﬁne an action of Π S on F that descends to an

GALOIS-THEORETIC KODAIRA-SPENCER 5
action on OT .I nf a c t ,h o w e v e r ,this sort of equivariance does not hold in the naive
sense, but only in the following “twisted sense”:
First, let us deﬁne the proﬁnite group with ΠS-action ΓS as follows: We take
the underlying proﬁnite group of ΓS to be ΠS itself. The ΠS-action on ΓS is deﬁned
to be the action given by: σ(γ)
def
= σ·γ·σ−1 (for σ ∈ ΠS, γ ∈ ΓS). Next, we endow
F with the ΓS-action deﬁned by thinking of Γ S as ΠS and using the V-action of
ΠS on F (cf. Deﬁnition 1.1). Then we have the following:
Proposition 1.3. The ΓS-action on F is compatible with the ΠS-actions on ΓS
and F (where we think of ΠS as acting on F by the D-action).
Proof. Indeed, if σ ∈ ΠS, γ ∈ ΓS, φ ∈F , m ∈ M, then:
(
σD {γ(φ)}
)
(m)= σ ·{ γ(φ)}(σ−1 · m)
= σ · γ · φ(σ−1 · m)
= σ · γ · σ−1 · σ · φ(σ−1 · m)
= σ(γ) · σ · φ(σ−1 · m)
= σ(γ) ·{ σD(φ)}(m)
=
{
σ(γ) ·
(
{σD(φ)}
)}
(m)
(where the superscript D denotes the D-action of the group element bearing the
superscript). This completes the proof. ⃝
Let us write Gal(Z/S) for the Galois group of the Galois covering UZ[d−1] →
US[d−1]. Then by forming the quotient ofZ by the action of Gal(Z/S) in the sense
of stacks, we obtain an algebraic stack Ssk
Z , together with morphisms
Z → Ssk
Z → S
where the ﬁrst morphism is Galois, ﬁnite ´etale (with Galois group Gal(Z/S)), and
the second morphism is an isomorphism over US[d−1]. If we let Z range over all
connected Galois, ﬁnite ´etale coverings ofS, the inverse limit of theZ (respectively,
Ssk
Z ) thus deﬁnes a “pro-scheme” ˜S (respectively, “pro-algebraic stack”Ssk)o v e rS,
together with morphisms:
˜S → Ssk → S
(where the ﬁrst morphism is “Galois, proﬁnite ´ etale” (with Galois group ΠS)a n d
the second morphism is anisomorphism over US[d−1]). Moreover, by ´etale descent,
the “proﬁnite group with Π S-action” ΓS deﬁnes a proﬁnite ´etale group scheme Γsk
S
over Ssk.

6 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Deﬁnition 1.4. We shall refer to Γsk
S as the algebraic fundamental groupoid of
Slog.
Note that sinceZ → Ssk
Z is ﬁnite (Galois) ´etale, the D-action of ΠS on Spec(F)
(where “ Spec” is to be understood as being taken with respect to the structure of
OZ-algebra on F) deﬁnes descent datafor Spec(F) with respect toZ → Ssk
Z (hence,
a fortiori, with respect to ˜S → Ssk). We shall denote the resulting descended object
over Ssk by:
Tsk → Ssk
Note that over US[d−1], we have Tsk|US[d− 1] = T |US[d− 1] (by Proposition 1.2).
Corollary 1.5. The action of ΓS on F descends to an action of the algebraic
fundamental groupoid Γsk
S on Tsk.
Proof. This follows immediately from Proposition 1.2, 1.3. ⃝
Remark. The terminology of Deﬁnition 1.4 may be justiﬁed as follows: First,
let us recall the well-known analogy between algebraic fundamental groups (such
as Π
S) and the usual topological fundamental groups of algebraic topology. This
analogy gives us the freedom to phrase our justiﬁcation in the language oftopological
fundamental groups.T h u s ,l e tX be a topological manifold. Note that for each point
x ∈ X, we obtain (in a natural way) a group:
x ↦→ π1(X,x )
i.e., the fundamental group with base-point x. This correspondence deﬁnes a local
system of groups on X, which is known (in algebraic topology) as thefundamental
groupoid of X. On the other hand, there is a well-known equivalence of categories
between local systems of groups on X and groups G equipped with an action
of π1(X,x ) (given by associating to such a local system its ﬁber at x, together
with the “monodromy action” of π1(X,x )). Moreover, it is an easy exercise to
check that, relative to this equivalence of categories, the fundamental groupoid
corresponds to the “group with π1(X,x )-action” deﬁned by letting π1(X,x ) act
on itself via conjugation (cf. the deﬁnition given above for the Π S-action on ΓS).
Thus, in summary, one may regard the object Γsk
S as the algebraic analogue of the
fundamental groupoid. This justiﬁes the terminology of Deﬁnition 1.4.
Remark. One other interesting observation relative to the appearance of the al-
gebraic fundamental groupoid (cf. Deﬁnition 1.4 — i.e., as opposed to group)i n
the correct formulation of the arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism (cf. Corollary
1.6 below) is the following. Recall that in the asserted analogy between the arith-
metic Kodaira-Spencer morphism of [Mzk1], Chapter IX, and the usual geometric

GALOIS-THEORETIC KODAIRA-SPENCER 7
Kodaira-Spencer morphism, the Galois group/fundamental group(oid) of the base
plays the role of the tangent bundle of the base . On the other hand, the tangent
bundle of the base (typically) does not admit a canonical global trivialization, but
instead varies from point to point — i.e., at a given point, it consists of inﬁnites-
imal motions originating from that point . Thus, it is natural that the arithmetic
analogue of the tangent bundle should be not the “static” fundamental group, but
instead the fundamental groupoid, which varies from point to point, and indeed,
at a given point, consists of paths (which may be thought of as a sort of “motion”)
originating from that point.
We are now ready to apply the above discussion to correct an error made in
[Mzk1], Chapter IX, in the deﬁnition given there of thearithmetic Kodaira-Spencer
morphism:
In [Mzk1], Chapter IX, Theorem 3.3, and the discussion preced-
ing it, it is falsely asserted that there is a natural action (“with
denominators”) of Π
S on HDR (notation of loc. cit. )a r i s i n g
from a natural action of Π S on T → S (notation of the present
discussion).
Although this assertion does indeed hold if theS-scheme T happens to be adisjoint
union of copies of S, in general, it is false. That is to say, the correct formulation
of this assertion is that the “twisted object” Γsk
S acts on Tsk (not that ΠS acts on
T).
Corollary 1.6. (Correction to Error in [Mzk1], Chapter IX, §3) The
phrase “natural action of ΠS on ... HDR” in [Mzk1], Chapter IX, Theorem 3.3,
should read
“natural action of Γsk
S on ... HDR|Ssk ”
(where “ |sk
S ” denotes the pull-back via the morphism Ssk → S), and the divisor of
possible poles “[η ⋂(dE)] +V (4)” should read
[η
⋂
(dE)] +V (d)
In particular, the resulting “arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism” κarith
E :
ΠS → Filt(HDR)(S) ((erroneous) notation of [Mzk1], Chapter IX, §3) should in
fact be thought of as a morphism
κarith, sk
E :Γ sk
S → Filt(HDR)|Ssk
of sheaves on the ´etale site of Ssk.
Proof. It remains only to remark that the reason for the divisor “ V (d)” (i.e., the
zero locus of the regular function determined by the integer d) is that the integral
structure on the pull-back to Z (notation of the present discussion) of OdE diﬀers

8 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
from that of F (cf. the notation “norm” appearing in Proposition 1.2) by a factor
which is bounded by the diﬀerent of the algebra OdE. Moreover, the fact that this
diﬀerent dividesd follows from the fact that multiplication byd on an elliptic curve
induces multiplication by d on the diﬀerentials of the elliptic curve. ⃝
Remark. Thus, in summary, what is done in [Mzk1], Chapter IX, §3, is literally
correct whenT → S happens to be a disjoint sum of copies ofS (a condition which
may be achieved by base-change). In general, however, there is a certain “twist”
that must be taken into account, but which was overlooked in the discussion of
[Mzk1], Chapter IX.
Section 2: Lagrangian Galois Actions
In this §, we study the Galois action on the torsion points of an elliptic curve,
along with the resulting “arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism” (cf.§1) under the
assumption that this Galois action preserves a “rank one multiplicative submodule
” of the module of torsion points . In this situation, we show that the resulting
“Lagrangian Galois action” is deﬁned without Gaussian poles, and, moreover, that
a “certain piece” of the resulting arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism coincides
with the classical Kodaira-Spencer morphism (cf. §2.2). This further strengthens
the analogy discussed in [Mzk1], Chapter IX, between the arithmetic (or “Galois-
theoretic”) Kodaira-Spencer morphism and the classical (“geometric”) Kodaira-
Spencer morphism.
§2.1. Deﬁnition and Construction
In this §, we maintain the notation of §1. Moreover, we assume that we are
given a Π
S-submodule Mμ ⊆ M whose underlying Z/dZ-submodule is free of rank
one. Thus, we obtain an exact sequence of ΠS-modules
0 → Mμ → M → Met → 0
(where Met is deﬁned so as to make this sequence exact). Thus, restricting OZ-
valued functions on M to Mμ gives rise to a surjection
F = Func(M, OZ) ↠ Fμ def
= Func(Mμ, OZ)
of OZ-algebras. Observe that the V-action (cf. Deﬁnition 1.1) of Π S on F mani-
festly preserves this surjection, so we get a natural V-action of ΠS on Fμ. Since,
moreover, we are operating under the assumption that ΠS preserves the submodule
Mμ ⊆ M, it thus follows that the P- and D-actions (cf. Deﬁnition 1.) of Π S on
F also preserve this surjection, so we also get natural P- and D-actions of ΠS on

GALOIS-THEORETIC KODAIRA-SPENCER 9
Fμ. In particular, (cf. Proposition 1.2) taking the spectrum (over S)o ft h eΠ S-
invariants of Fμ with respect to the D-action gives rise to a scheme Tμ together
with a morphism
Tμ → T
which is a closed immersion over US[d−1]. (Note that since the operation of taking
ΠS-invariants is not necessarily right exact, it is not clear whether or not Tμ → T
is a closed immersion over S.)
Next, let us suppose that we are given a splitting
MH ⊆ M
of the surjection of modules M ↠ Met (i.e., a submodule MH ⊆ M such that
the morphism MH → Met is bijective), which is not necessarily preserved by ΠS.
Even if MH is not preserved by ΠS, however, since Mμ ⊆ M is preserved by ΠS,
it follows that an element σ ∈ ΠS will always carry MH ⊆ M to another splitting
MHσ
⊆ M of the surjection M ↠ Met.
Next, we return to the “de Rham point of view,” and consider sections of
line bundles on the universal extension of E. Also, for simplicity, we assume from
now on that S is Z-ﬂat ,a n dt h a td is odd. Then we would like to consider the
Hodge-Arakelov Comparison Isomorphism (cf. [Mzk1], Introduction, Theorem A),
so, in the following discussion, we will use the notation of [Mzk1], Introduction,
and [Mzk3], §9. (Here, we recall that certain minor errors in [Mzk1], Introduction,
Theorem A were corrected in [Mzk3], §9, Theorem 9.2.) Thus, we assume that we
have been given an integer m that does not divide d, together with a torsion point
η ∈ E∞ ,S(S∞ )
of order preciselym which deﬁnes a metrized line bundle Lst,η on E∞ ,S (cf. [Mzk1],
Chapter V, §1). Here, we recall that S∞ is the stack (in the ﬁnite, ﬂat topology)
obtained from S by gluing together US (“away from inﬁnity”) to the proﬁnite
covering of S (“near inﬁnity”) deﬁned by “adjoining a compatible system of N-th
roots of the q-parameter” (asN ranges multiplicatively over the positive integers).
Over S∞ , we have the group object
E∞ ,S → S∞
which is equal to E → S over US (“away from inﬁnity”), and whose “special ﬁber”
consists of connected components indexed by Q/Z, each of which is isomorphic to
a copy of Gm — cf. the discussion of [Mzk1], Chapter V, §2, for more details. For
simplicity, we shall also assume that n
def
=2 m is invertible on S. In the following
discussion, we shall simply write L for Lst,η. Thus, in particular, over US:

10 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
L|US = OE(d · [η])|US
Also, let us write
Ed,Z → Z
for the object which is equal to EZ
def
= E ×S Z over UZ, and, “near inﬁnity,” is the
pull-back to Z of the object “ Ed” (cf. [Mzk1], Chapter IV, §4, where we take “N”
of loc. cit. to be d). (In words, this object “ Ed” is the complement of the nodes of
the unique regular semi-stable model of the Tate curve (withq-parameter “q”) over
the base Z[[q
1
d ]].) Then the object “ E∗
[d],et → E” of [Mzk3], §9, deﬁnes an object
E∗
[d],et,Z → Ed,Z
(which, over (UZ)Q, may be identiﬁed with the universal extension E† → E of E)
over Ed,Z. Indeed, the discussion of [Mzk3], §9, applies literally over UZ;“ n e a r
inﬁnity,” the fact that we get an object over Ed,Z follows from the fact that the
integral structure in question, i.e., “
(d·(T −(iχ /2m))
r
)
” (in the notation of [Mzk3], §9)
is invariant with respect to the transformations T ↦→ T + j
d , ∀j ∈ Z.
Note that L has an associated theta group (cf. [Mzk1], Chapter IV, §1, §5, for
a discussion of theta groups) GZ over Z which ﬁts into an exact sequence:
1 → (Gm)Z →G Z → dEZ → 1
(where dEZ (⊆ Ed,Z) → Z is the ﬁnite ﬂat group scheme of d-torsion points). Let
us suppose that the submodulesMμ,M H ⊆ M arise from the restriction toUZ[d−1]
of ﬁnite ﬂat group schemes
Gμ
Z,HZ ⊆ dEZ
over Z such that the resulting morphism Gμ
Z ×Z HZ → dEZ is an isomorphism of
group schemes. Thus, (cf. Proposition 1.2) we have a natural inclusion
OGμ
Z
↪→F μ
of ﬁnite OZ-algebras, which is an isomorphism over UZ[d−1]. In the following
discussion, we also assume that Gμ
Z has been chosen so that the subalgebraOGμ
Z
↪→
Fμ is preserved by the various actions (i.e., V-, P-, D-) of ΠS on Fμ. Finally, let
us assume that we are given a lifting
HZ ⊆G Z

GALOIS-THEORETIC KODAIRA-SPENCER 11
of HZ (i.e., HZ
∼
→ HZ via GZ → dEZ). (Thus, HZ is a “Lagrangian subgroup” (cf.
[MB], Chapitre V, D´eﬁnition 2.5.1) of the theta group GZ.) In particular, we get a
natural action of HZ ∼= HZ on L.
In the following discussion, we will always denote (by abuse of notation)struc-
ture morphisms to S, Z, E∞ ,S by f (cf. the conventions of [Mzk1]). We would like
to consider the push-forward
VL
def
= f∗(LE∗
[d],et,Z
)
of the pull-back LE∗
[d],et,Z
of the metrized line bundle L to E∗
[d],et,Z. (Here, we
take the integral structure of this push-forward “near inﬁnity” to be the unique
GZ-stable integral structure determined by the “ ζCG
r ” — cf. [Mzk1], Chapter V,
Theorem 4.8; the discussion of [Mzk3],§4.1, 4.2.) Thus, VL is a quasi-coherent sheaf
on Z. Also, often we would like to consider the ﬁltration Fr(VL) ⊆V L consisting
of sections whose “torsorial degree” is <r . (Here, by “torsorial degree,” we mean
the relative degree with respect to the structure of “relative polynomial algebra”
on O
E† over OE (arising from the fact that E† → E is an aﬃne torsor). Since E†
may be identiﬁed with E∗
[d],et,Z over (UZ)Q, this deﬁnition also applies to sections
of VL.) In particular, we shall write
HDR
def
= Fd(VL)
for the object which appears in [Mzk1], Introduction, Theorem A (cf. also [Mzk3],
Theorem 9.2). Thus, HDR is a vector bundle of rank d on Z. Finally, observe that
the theta group GZ acts naturally on VL, Fr(VL), HDR.
Next, let us observe that (by the assumption that n =2 m is invertible on S)
the d-torsion subgroup scheme dEZ ⊆ Ed,Z lifts (uniquely!) to a subgroup scheme:
dE∗ ⊆ E∗
[d],et,Z
(Indeed, this follows from the fact that the integral structure used to deﬁneE∗
[d],et,Z
is given by “
(d·(T −(iχ /2m))
r
)
” (in the notation of [Mzk3], §9), an expression which
gives integral values ∈O S for all T = j
d (for j ∈ Z).) Moreover, we recall from
[Mzk1], Chapter IX, §3, that (since d is odd)w eh a v ea“theta trivialization”
L|dEZ
∼= L|0EZ
⊗OZ OdEZ
(where 0EZ ∈ EZ(Z) is the zero section ofEZ
def
= E ×S Z → Z) of the restriction of
L to dEZ ⊆ Ed,Z. Note, moreover, since L is deﬁned over E∞ ,S (i.e., without base-
changing to Z), it follows that L|0EZ
is, in fact, deﬁned over S∞ (i.e., in other
words, it is deﬁned over S, except that “near inﬁnity,” one may need to adjoin
roots of the q-parameter). In particular, it follows that there is a natural action of
Gal(Z/S) —h e n c eo fΠS (via the surjection ΠS ↠ Gal(Z/S))—o n L0EZ
.

12 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Thus, by restricting sections of L over E∗
[d],et,Z to dE∗ ⊆ E∗
[d],et,Z,a n dc o m -
posing with the theta trivialization reviewed above, we obtain a morphism:
ΞV : VL → L|0EZ
⊗OZ OdEZ
Similarly, if we introduce Gaussian poles (cf. [Mzk1], Introduction, Theorem A,
(3); [Mzk3], Theorem 6.2), we get a morphism:
ΞGP
V : VGP
L → L|0EZ
⊗OZ OdEZ
Then the main result of [Mzk1] may be summarized as follows:
Theorem 2.1. (Review of the Main Result of [Mzk1]) Assume that d is
odd and that n
def
=2 m is invertible on S. Then restriction of sections of L over
E∗
[d],et,Z to the d-torsion points, composed with the canonical “theta trivialization”
of L over the d-torsion points yields a morphism
ΞV : VL → L|0EZ
⊗OZ OdEZ
whose restriction
ΞH : HDR → L|0EZ
⊗OZ OdEZ
to HDR
def
= Fd(VL) ⊆V L satisﬁes: (i) ΞH is an isomorphism over UZ; (ii) if one
introduces Gaussian poles , i.e., if one considers
ΞGP
H : HGP
DR → L|0EZ
⊗OZ OdEZ
then ΞGP
H is an isomorphism over Z.
Proof. We refer to [Mzk1], Introduction, Theorem A, especially (2), (3). Note
that the “zero locus of the determinant” is empty because of our assumption that
n is invertible on S. ⃝
Next, let us observe that it follows from the fact that the morphism G
μ
Z ×Z
HZ → dEZ is an isomorphism of group schemes that the composite
OHZ
dEZ ⊆O dEZ ↠ OGμ
Z
(where OHZ
dEZ denotes the subalgebra of OdEZ of functions which are invariant with
respect to the natural action ofHZ on OdEZ )i sa nisomorphism. Thus, by applying
this isomorphism to the various morphisms obtained by takingHZ ∼= HZ-invariants
of the various morphisms of Theorem 2.1, we obtain the following result:

GALOIS-THEORETIC KODAIRA-SPENCER 13
Corollary 2.2. (Lagrangian V ersion of the Main Result of [Mzk1])
Assume that d is odd and that n
def
=2 m is invertible on S. Then by applying the
isomorphism OHZ
dEZ ⊆O dEZ ↠ OGμ
Z
to the result of taking HZ ∼= HZ-invariants of
the various morphisms of Theorem 2.1, we obtain a morphism
ΞHZ
V : VHZ
L → L|0EZ
⊗OZ OGμ
Z
whose restriction
ΞHZ
H : HHZ
DR → L|0EZ
⊗OZ OGμ
Z
to HHZ
DR
def
= Fd(VHZ
L ) ⊆V HZ
L satisﬁes: (i) ΞHZ
H is an isomorphism over UZ; (ii) if
one introduces Gaussian poles , i.e., if one considers
ΞGP,HZ
H : HGP,HZ
DR → L|0EZ
⊗OZ OGμ
Z
then ΞGP,HZ
H is an isomorphism over Z.
Proof. This follows from Theorem 2.1, together with the elementary observation
that taking the HZ ∼= HZ-invariants of an HZ ∼= HZ-equivariant isomorphism is
again an isomorphism. ⃝
Before proceeding, we recall that VHZ
L admits the following interpretation:
Since HZ ∼= HZ acts on Ed,Z; E∞ ,S; E∗
[d],et,Z; L,w em a yf o r mt h equotients of
these objects by this action. This yields objects ( Ed,Z)H,( E∞ ,S)H,( E∗
[d],et,Z)H,
(L)H (a metrized line bundle on (E∞ ,S)H). Then we have:
VHZ
L = f∗{(L)H |(E∗
[d],et,Z)H }
(where f as usual denotes the structure morphism toZ) — cf., e.g., [Mzk1], Chapter
IV, Theorem 1.4.
Deﬁnition 2.3. The V-, P-, and D-actions of Π S on Gμ
Z, together with the
isomorphism ΞGP,HZ
H of Corollary 2.2, and the natural action of ΠS on L|0EZ
, deﬁne
V-, P-, and D-actions of ΠS on HGP,HZ
DR , which we shall refer to as the Lagrangian
Galois actions on HGP,HZ
DR .
Remark. Thus, unlike the “naive” Galois actions of §1, the Lagrangian Galois
actions depend on the choice of the additional data Mμ, MH.
Remark. Thus, a priori, the Lagrangian Galois actions appear to require theGauss-
ian poles (i.e., it appears that they are not necessarily integrally deﬁned on HHZ
DR).
In fact, however, we shall see in §2.2 below that (under certain assumptions) the

14 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Lagrangian Galois D-action has the remarkable property that it is deﬁned with-
out introducing the Gaussian poles. This property is not possessed by the “naive”
(non-Lagrangian) Galois actions of §1.
§2.2. Relation to the Crystalline Theta Object
In this §, we continue to use the notations of §2.1, except that we further
specialize them as follows. Let A be a complete discrete valuation ring of mixed
characteristic (0,p), with perfect residue ﬁeld .W r i t eK (respectively, k) for the
quotient ﬁeld (respectively, residue ﬁeld )o f A.I n t h i s§, we suppose that S is of
the form:
S =S p e c (A[[q
1
N ]])
for some positive integer N prime to d, and that the log structure on S is that
deﬁned by the divisor V (q
1
N ) ⊆ S. Also, we suppose that the given log elliptic
curve Clog → Slog is the “Tate curve,” i.e., that it has “ q-parameter” equal to
q ∈O S.
Thus, if we take A suﬃciently large, we may assume that Z is of the form:
Z =S p e c (A[[q
1
N ·d ]])
and that the log structure on Z is that deﬁned by the divisor V (q
1
N ·d ) ⊆ Z.T h u s ,
we obtain a morphism Zlog → Slog of log schemes.
Write EZ
def
= E ×S Z.T h u s ,EZ → Z is a one-dimensional semi-abelian scheme
over Z. Note that EZ has a unique ﬁnite ﬂat subgroup scheme annihilated by d.
This subgroup scheme is naturally isomorphic toμd. We take this subgroup scheme
for our
μd ∼= Gμ
Z ⊆ dEZ ⊆ EZ
(and note that it is easy to see that this Gμ
Z satisﬁes the condition (cf. §2.1) that
OGμ
Z
⊆F μ be preserved by the V-, P-, and D-actions of Π S on Fμ). Moreover,
since (dEZ)/Gμ
Z is naturally isomorphic to the constant group scheme (Z/dZ)Z,i t
is easy to see that, over Z, there exists a ﬁnite ´etale group scheme HZ ⊆ dEZ such
that the natural morphism
Gμ
Z ×Z HZ → dEZ
is an isomorphism of group schemes. Thus, if we write EHZ
def
=( Ed,Z)H,t h e nw e
see that EHZ → Z is a one-dimensional semi-abelian group scheme (i.e., its ﬁbers
are all geometrically connected), and that the natural quotient morphism

GALOIS-THEORETIC KODAIRA-SPENCER 15
(EZ ⊆) Ed,Z ↠ EHZ
(over Z) has kernel equal to HZ, hence is ﬁnite ´etale of degree d. Finally, we note
that the q-parameter of EHZ is a d-th root of q. This completes our description of
the specializations of the objects of §2.1 that we will use in the present §.
Next, we would like torelate the present discussion to the theory of connections
in [Mzk3]. To begin with, we recall that L|0EZ
(where 0EZ ∈ EZ(Z) is the zero
section of EZ → Z)i sa line bundle on Z equipped with a natural ΠS-action;
moreover, this ΠS-action is derived from the fact that L|0EZ
in fact arises from a
“line bundle on S∞ .” Thus, there exists a trivialization
τ: L|0EZ
∼= q− a
N ·d ·O Z
(where a is a nonnegative integer<N d) — i.e., in the terminology of the discussion
of [Mzk3], §5, a rigidiﬁcation of L at 0EZ —w h i c hi sΠ S-equivariant.I n t h e
following discussion, we ﬁx such a “Π S-equivariant rigidiﬁcation” τ.
Observe that τ deﬁnes, in particular, a logarithmic connection on the line
bundle L|0EZ
which is stable under the action ofΠS. Thus, according to the theory
of [Mzk3], §5, this rigidiﬁcation gives rise to (logarithmic) connections
∇ VL
, ∇ V
HZ
L
on VL, VHZ
L , respectively (cf. [Mzk3], Theorems 5.2, 8.1), which are stabilized
by the action of ΠS. Here, the logarithmic connections are relative to the log
structure of Zlog, and all connections, diﬀerentials, etc., are to be understood as
being continuous with respect to the (p, q)-adic topology on OZ.
Moreover, sinceall higher p-curvatures of these connections vanish(cf. [Mzk3],
§7.1, for a discussion of the general theory of higherp-curvatures; [Mzk3], Corollary
7.6, for the vanishing result just quoted), we thus conclude that VL, VHZ
L deﬁne
“crystals” on the site
Inf(Zlog ⊗ k/A)
of inﬁnitesimal thickenings over A of open sub-log schemes of Zlog ⊗ k = Zlog ⊗
(A/mA). That is to say, usually, “crystals” are deﬁned on sites of PD-thickenings
(cf., e.g., [BO], §6, for a discussion of this theory), but here, since all of the higher
p-curvatures vanish, we obtain crystals on the site of thickenings which do not
necessarily admit PD-structures. Since the deﬁnitions and proofs of basic properties
of such “crystals on Inf” are entirely similar to the divided power case, we leave the
unenlightening details to the reader. Thus, in summary, we may think of the pairs
(V
L, ∇ VL
); ( VHZ
L , ∇ V
HZ
L
)

16 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
as crystals on Inf(Zlog ⊗ k/A).
In the following discussion, we will not use the entire group Π S, but only its
“ m-inertia subgroup”Πm
S ⊆ ΠS, deﬁned as follows:
(ΠS ⊇)Π m
S
def
= {σ ∈ ΠS | σ(φ) ≡ φ (mod mA ·O Z), ∀φ ∈O Z }
Thus, in particular, one veriﬁes easily that the image Galm(Z/S)o fΠ m
S in Gal(Z/S)
is a p-group. More precisely, if we write
d = dp · d̸=p
(where dp, d̸=p are positive integers; dp is a power of p;a n d d̸=p is prime to p),
then one veriﬁes immediately (using the simple explicit structures ofS, Z) that the
correspondence
ΠS ∋ σ ↦→ σ(q
1
N ·d )/q
1
N ·d
deﬁnes isomorphisms:
Πm
S ↠ Galm(Z/S)
∼
→ (Z/dpZ)(1)
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
ΠS ↠ Gal(Z/S)
∼
→ (Z/dZ)(1)
(where the vertical arrows are the natural inclusions, and the horizontal arrows are
deﬁned by the correspondence just mentioned).
Next, let us observe that it follows immediately from the deﬁnition of Πm
S that
every σ ∈ Πm
S deﬁnes an A-linear isomorphism
σ : Zlog ∼
→ Zlog
which is the identity on Zlog ⊗ k. It thus follows from:
(i) the fact that Zlog deﬁnes a(n) (inductive system of) thickening(s) in the
category Inf(Zlog ⊗ k/A); and
(iii) the fact that (VHZ
L , ∇ V
HZ
L
) forms a crystal on Inf(Zlog ⊗ k/A)
that σ induces a σ-semi-linear isomorphism
∫
σ
: ˆVHZ
L → ˆVHZ
L

GALOIS-THEORETIC KODAIRA-SPENCER 17
(where “σ-semi-linear” means semi-linear with respect to the action ofσ on OZ,a n d
the “hat” denotes p-adic completion). Here, the justiﬁcation for the notation “
∫
σ”
is that this isomorphism is the analogue of the isomorphism obtained in diﬀerential
geometry by “parallel transporting” — i.e., “integrating” — sections of ˆVHZ
L along
the “path” σ (where we think of σ as an “element of the (algebraic) fundamental
group” ΠS). That is to say, we obtain a natural ΠS-semi-linear action of ΠS on
ˆVHZ
L . (In fact, the same holds for “ ˆVHZ
L ” replaced by “ˆVL,” but since this action is
more interesting for ˆVHZ
L , we restrict ourselves to the case of ˆVHZ
L in the following
discussion.)
Theorem 2.4. (Crystalline Nature of the Lagrangian Galois Action)
The action of ΠS on ˆVHZ
L is compatible withΞHZ
/CQ
V (cf. Corollary 2.2; here the “hat”
denotes p-adic completion) and the D-action on Gμ
Z in the following sense: For
σ ∈ ΠS, the following diagram commutes:
ˆVHZ
L
Ξ
HZ
/CQ
V
−→ L|0EZ
⊗OZ OGμ
Z
⏐⏐↓
/CA
σ
⏐⏐↓σD
ˆVHZ
L
Ξ
HZ
/CQ
V
−→ L|0EZ
⊗OZ OGμ
Z
(where σD denotes the result of applyingσ to OGμ
Z
via the D-action ofΠS on OGμ
Z
).
Proof. This follows from the naturality of all the morphisms involved, together
with the compatibility (cf. [Mzk3], Theorem 6.1) over Gμ
Z of the connection ∇ V
HZ
L
with the “theta trivialization” reviewed in §2.1. ⃝
Corollary 2.5. (Absence of Gaussian Poles in the Lagrangian Galois
Action) Relative to the objects of the present discussion, the Lagrangian Galois D-
action of ΠS on HGP,HZ
DR (cf. Deﬁnition 2.3) is deﬁned without Gaussian poles ,
i.e., it arises from an action of ΠS on HHZ
DR.
Proof. This follows immediately from the commutative diagram of Theorem 2.4,
together with Lemma 2.6 below: Indeed, since the morphism “
∫
σ”i sintegral(i.e., in
particular, deﬁned without Gaussian poles), restricting this commutative diagram
to HHZ
DR ⊆ ˆVHZ
L (i.e., where “ ˆVHZ
L ” denotes the “ˆVHZ
L ” in the upper left-hand corner
of the diagram) shows that by computing the Lagrangian D-actioninside ˆVHZ
L and
then applying Lemma 2.6 to the lower horizontal arrow of the diagram, we obtain
the asserted integrality. ⃝
Lemma 2.6. The image of the morphism ΞHZ
/CQ
V (cf. Corollary 2.2) is the same
as the image of its restriction ΞHZ
H to HHZ
DR ⊆ ˆVHZ
L .

18 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Proof. In a word, these two images coincide because both images are equal to
the image of the theta convolution (studied in detail in [Mzk2], cf. especially §10).
Indeed, this is essentially the content of the proof of [Mzk2], Theorem 10.1. In this
proof, only the image of Ξ HZ
H — i.e., more concretely, the span of the derivatives
of the theta function “Θ” of order <d — is discussed, and this image is shown to
be the same as that of the theta convolution; but the argument never uses that the
derivatives are of order <d — i.e., the exact same argument shows that the image
of Ξ
HZ
/CQ
V (= the span of the derivatives of the theta function “Θ” of arbitrary order)
is equal to the image of the theta convolution.
For the convenience of the reader, however, we review the argument brieﬂy as
follows: If we write “U” for the standard coordinate onGm, then the image of ΞHZ
H
(respectively, ΞHZ
/CQ
V ) may be identiﬁed with the span of the restrictions to μd ⊆ Gm
of the derivatives ( ∂
∂U )jΘ—w h e r e
Θ
def
=
∑
k∈Z
q
1
d (1
2 ·k2+(iχ /n)·k) · Uk · χ(k)
(and χ (a characterZ → μn), iχ (an integer) are invariants associated to the torsion
point η)—o f order <d (respectively, arbitrary order). On the other hand, a basis
of the functions on μd is given by U0,... ,U d−1. If one computes the coordinates
(relative to this basis) of Θ |μd , one sees that the coeﬃcient of the smallest power
of q appearing in each coordinate is either a root of unity or a root of unity times
a nonzero sum of two n-th roots of unity (cf. [Mzk2], Theorem 4.4, where we take
dord to be 1). Since we have assumed that n is invertible on S (cf. Theorem 2.1),
we thus obtain that this coeﬃcient is always a unit. On the other hand, to give an
element in the span in question is to consider the restriction toμd ⊆ Gm of a series
∑
k∈Z
q
1
d (1
2 ·k2+(iχ /n)·k) · P(k) · Uk · χ(k)
where P(−) is a polynomial (with coeﬃcients in OZ ⊗ Q, but which maps Z into
OZ)o fd e g r e e<d (respectively, arbitrary degree) in the case of ΞHZ
H (respectively,
ΞHZ
/CQ
V ). Thus, in short, the assertion of Lemma 2.6 amounts to the claim that the
span of
{P(k) · qΦ(k) · Uk}k=0,... ,d−1
(for some function Φ : {0, ... ,d − 1}→ 1
N ·d · Z) is the same, regardless of whether
one restricts the degree of P((−)t ob e <d or not. But this is easily veriﬁed. ⃝
Finally, we observe that:
Theorem 2.4 allows us to relate the “arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer
morphism” arising from the Lagrangian Galois action to the clas-
sical geometric Kodaira-Spencer morphism.

GALOIS-THEORETIC KODAIRA-SPENCER 19
as follows: Let
Γ ⊆ Galm(Z/S)
be a subgroup of order> 2. Write dΓ
def
= |Γ| for the order of Γ. Thus,dΓ ̸= 1 divides
dp, and we have a natural isomorphism Γ ∼= (Z/dΓZ)(1) (cf. the discussion above
immediately following the deﬁnition of Π m
S ). Write
(p · A ⊆) mΓ ⊊ A
for the ideal generated by elements of the form 1 − ζ,w h e r eζ is a dΓ-th root of
unity. Note that Γ acts trivially on Z ⊗ (A/mΓ)( m o dmΓ). Moreover, we have a
homomorphism
λΓ : μdΓ(A) → mΓ/m2
Γ
given by ζ ↦→ ζ− 1( m o dm2
Γ). Thus, if we think of μdΓ(A)a s“ (Z/dΓZ)(1)” (which
is naturally isomorphic to Γ), then we see that λΓ deﬁnes a homomorphism
δΓ :Γ → mΓ/m2
Γ
which is easily seen (by the deﬁnition of the ideal mΓ) to induce an injection Γ ⊗
(Z/pZ) ↪→ mΓ/m2
Γ.
Next, we would like to consider a“certain portion” of the “arithmetic Kodaira-
Spencer morphism” associated to the Lagrangian Galois action, which will turn out
to be related to the classical Kodaira-Spencer morphism. Let γ ∈ Γ. Then since γ
acts on HHZ
DR via the Lagrangian Galois D-action (Deﬁnition 2.3, Corollary 2.5), we
see that γ deﬁnes a morphism γD : HHZ
DR →H HZ
DR.I fw e restrict this morphism to
F1(HHZ
DR), and compose with the surjection HHZ
DR ↠ {HHZ
DR/F2(HHZ
DR)}⊗ A (A/m2
Γ),
we thus obtain a morphism
F1(HHZ
DR) →{ H HZ
DR/F2(HHZ
DR)}⊗ A (A/m2
Γ)
which (as one veriﬁes easily — by using the fact that γ is the identity onHHZ
DR ⊗A k,
HHZ
DR ⊗ mΓ/m2
Γ) vanishes on mΓ · F1(HHZ
DR) and maps into {HHZ
DR/F2(HHZ
DR)}⊗ A
mΓ/m2
Γ). Thus, we obtain a morphism
κγ : F1(HHZ
DR) ⊗ k →{ H HZ
DR/F2(HHZ
DR)}⊗ A mΓ/m2
Γ
which we would like to analyze by applying Theorem 2.4. If one reduces the com-
mutative diagram of Theorem 2.4 modulo m2
Γ, it follows that κγ may be computed
by applying the (logarithmic) connection ∇ V
HZ
L
on VHZ
L in the logarithmic tangent
direction

20 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
∂
∂log(q
1
N ·d )
· δΓ(γ)
— where we observe that
γ(q
1
N ·d ) ≡ q
1
N ·d + δΓ(γ) · q
1
N ·d (mod m2
Γ)
(cf. the deﬁnition of δΓ, λΓ given above). That is to say, Applying ∇ V
HZ
L
in this
logarithmic tangent direction to F1(HHZ
DR) ⊗ k = F1(VHZ
L ) ⊗ k ⊆V L ⊗ k and then
projecting via VHZ
L ⊗ k ↠ VHZ
L /F2(VHZ
L ) ⊗ k deﬁnes a morphism:
F1(VHZ
L ) ⊗ k →V HZ
L /F2(VHZ
L ) ⊗ mΓ/m2
Γ
On the other hand, by [Mzk3], Theorem 8.1 (i.e., the property which was called
“Griﬃths semi-transversality” in loc. cit. ), this morphism in fact maps into the
submodule F3(VHZ
L )/F2(VHZ
L ) ⊗ mΓ/m2
Γ. Moreover, ( F3/F2)(VHZ
L ) is naturally
isomorphic to 1
2 · F1(VHZ
L ) ⊗ τ⊗2
EHZ
(where we write τEHZ
for the tangent bundle to
EHZ at the origin 0EHZ
). In particular, we obtain that κγ also maps into F3(−).
(Note that here we use that d ≥ dp ≥ dΓ ≥ 3.) Thus, by letting γ vary, we obtain
a homomorphism:
κΓ :Γ → HomOZ (F1(HHZ
DR) ⊗ k, (F3/F2)(HHZ
DR) ⊗ mΓ/m2
Γ)= 1
2 · τ⊗2
EHZ
⊗ mΓ/m2
Γ
arising from theLagrangian Galois action, taken modulom2
Γ, which, when regarded
as an element
κΓ ∈ Hom(Γ, 1
2 · τ⊗2
EHZ
⊗ mΓ/m2
Γ) = Hom(Γ, mΓ/m2
Γ) ⊗ 1
2 · τ⊗2
EHZ
is equal to the result of evaluating thegeometric Kodaira-Spencer morphism of the
“crystalline theta object” (VHZ
L , ∇ V
HZ
L
) (cf. [Mzk3], Theorem 8.1)
κ∇ :( ΩZlog/A)∨ → 1
2 · τ⊗2
EHZ
on ∂
∂log(q
1
N ·d )
∈ (ΩZlog/A)∨ and multiplying the result by δΓ. We summarize this
discussion as follows:
Corollary 2.7. (Relation to the Classical Geometric Kodaira-Spencer
Morphism) Let
Γ ⊆ Galm(Z/S)

GALOIS-THEORETIC KODAIRA-SPENCER 21
be a subgroup of order > 2. This subgroup Γ gives rise to a natural ideal mΓ ⊆
A (minimal among ideals modulo which Γ acts trivially on Zlog) and a natural
morphism
δΓ :Γ → mΓ/m2
Γ
(deﬁned by considering the action of Γ on q
1
N ·d modulo m2
Γ). Then the morphism
κΓ :Γ → HomOZ (F1(HHZ
DR) ⊗ k, (F3/F2)(HHZ
DR) ⊗ mΓ/m2
Γ)= 1
2 · τ⊗2
EHZ
⊗ mΓ/m2
Γ
obtained purely from the Lagrangian Galois D-action of Γ on HHZ
DR (cf. Deﬁ-
nition 2.3, Corollary 2.5) by restricting this action to F1(HHZ
DR) and then reducing
modulo m2
Γ coincides with the morphism obtained by evaluating the “geometric
Kodaira-Spencer morphism of the crystalline theta object” (VHZ
L , ∇ V
HZ
L
)
(cf. [Mzk3], Theorem 8.1)
κ∇ :( ΩZlog/A)∨ → 1
2 · τ⊗2
EHZ
in the logarithmic tangent direction ∂
∂log(q
1
N ·d )
∈ (ΩZlog/A)∨ and multiplying the
result by δΓ. Moreover, by [Mzk3], Theorem 8.1, this Kodaira-Spencer morphism
associated to the crystalline theta object coincides (up to a factor of1
2) with the usual
Kodaira-Spencer morphism associated to the Gauss-Manin connection on the ﬁrst de
Rham cohomology group. Thus, in summary, the arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer
morphism associated to the Lagrangian Galois D-action coincides modulom2
Γ (and
up to a factor of 1
2)w i t ht h eusual Kodaira-Spencer morphism .
Remark. Note, moreover, that the correspondence between the logarithmic tangent
direction ∂
∂log(q
1
N ·d )
∈ (ΩZlog/A)∨ and the morphismδΓ is essentially the same as the
correspondence arising from Faltings’ theory of almost ´etale extensions between the
logarithmic tangent bundle ofZlog and a certain Galois cohomology group (cf., e.g.,
[Mzk1], Chapter IX, §2, especially Theorem 2.6, for more details). In particular:
Corollary 2.7 shows that the analogy discussed in [Mzk1], Chap-
ter IX, between the (usual)geometric Kodaira-Spencer mor-
phism (cf. especially, [Mzk1], Chapter IX, Theorem 2.6) and the
arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer morphism is more than just
philosophy — it is rigorous mathematics!
(cf. also the discussion of [Mzk3], Theorem 6.2, in [Mzk3], §0).
Section 3: Global Multiplicative Subspaces
In this §, we show how to construct a sort of global analogue of the crucial
subgroup scheme “ Gμ
Z ⊆ dEZ”o f §2.2. The author believes that this construc-
tion indicates the proper approach to globalizing the local theory of §2 —c f . §4,
“Conclusion.”

22 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
In this §,l e tu sw r i t eMZ for the moduli stack (M1,0)Z (cf. §0, Notations
and Conventions); MZ ⊆ MZ for the open substack parametrizing smooth elliptic
curves. We denote base change to Q by a subscript Q. Also, let us write
ΠMQ
def
= π1(MQ)
(for some choice of base-point).
Next, let us ﬁx a prime number p.T h u s , t h ep-power torsion points of the
tautological elliptic curve over MQ deﬁne a p-adic Tate module
F
— i.e., F is a free Zp-module of rank two equipped with a continuous ΠMQ -action
ρF :Π MQ → GL(F). Write
TQ →M Q
for theproﬁnite ´etale coveringdeﬁned by the subgroup Ker(ρF ) ⊆ ΠMQ .S i n c eρF is
surjective (cf., e.g., [Shi], Theorem 6.23, together with the fact that the cyclotomic
character Gal(Q/Q) → Zp
× is surjective), it follows that TQ →M Q is Galois,w i t h
Galois group
Gal(TQ/MQ) ∼= GL2(Zp)
(where the isomorphism is determined by a choice of Zp-basis for F). Write
T Z → MZ
for the normalization of MZ in TQ; TZ
def
= T Z ×MZ
MZ. Also, in the following dis-
cussion, we will denote the p-adic formal schemes (or stacks) deﬁned by p-adically
completing various schemes (or stacks) by means of a superscript “∧.”
Now note that the natural Π MQ -actions on ˆT Z and F deﬁne a natural ΠMQ -
action on
O
/CQ
T Z
⊗Zp F
(which we regard as a coherent sheaf on ˆT Z). Let us write ωE for the line bun-
dle on MZ deﬁned by the cotangent bundle at the origin of the tautological log
elliptic curve over MZ. Then we recall the following result, which is essentially an
immediate corollary of the p-adic Hodge theory of elliptic curves:

GALOIS-THEORETIC KODAIRA-SPENCER 23
Theorem 3.1. (Global Multiplicative Subspace) There is a natural ΠMQ -
equivariant morphism
ψω : O
/CQ
T Z
⊗Zp F→ ωE |
/CQ
T Z
whose image contains (1 − ζp) · ωE |
/CQ
T Z
,w h e r eζp is a primitive p-th root of unity.
Moreover, away from the supersingular points ofT Z ⊗Fp, this morphism is a surjec-
tion, and (in a formal neighborhood of inﬁnity) its kernel is the subspace deﬁned by
the multiplicative subgroup schemes “Gμ
Z ⊆ dEZ” (cf. §2.2) where we take d
def
= pn,
n →∞ .
Proof. The morphism ψω is what is usually referred to in p-adic Hodge theory as
the p-adic period map. There are many ways to construct the p-adic period map.
Over the smooth locus MZ, one way to construct the period map (cf. [Mzk3], §2,
the Remark following the proof of Theorem 2.2) is to use the canonical section
(deﬁned modulo pn — cf. [Mzk3], §1, the discussion following Lemma 1.1 for more
details on this canonical section)
κH : H ⊗ (Z/pnZ) → E† ⊗ (Z/pnZ)
of the universal extension E† → E (where E →M Z is the tautological elliptic
curve) over the coveringH (
def
= E) → E of E given by multiplication bypn (where
we let n →∞ ). By looking at “ﬁbers (of H, E† ) over the origin of E,” we thus
see that κH determines a homomorphism from the pn-torsion points of E|
/CQ
TZ
, i.e., in
particular, from F⊗ (Z/pnZ) ↪→ E( ˆTZ), to ωE ⊗ (Z/pnZ)|
/CQ
TZ
, as desired. Note that
although only the smooth case is discussed in loc. cit. , one veriﬁes immediately
that this approach may be extended over MZ (by using the canonical section of
the universal extension near inﬁnity). Letting n →∞ and tensoring over Zp with
O
/CQ
T Z
thus completes the construction of ψω.
The remaining statements concerning the various properties of ψω may be
veriﬁed by using another approach to constructing the p-adic period map, which is
discussed in [Mzk1], Chapter IX,§2. This approach has the slight disadvantage that
it is not immediately clear that the resulting period map is deﬁned over ˆT Z (i.e.,
a priori, it is only deﬁned over locally constructed “ ˆR’s”). Nevertheless, one may
check easily (by working over the ordinary locus) that these two approaches yield
the same period map (cf. [Mzk3], §2, the Remark following the proof of Theorem
2.2). On the other hand, the approach of [Mzk1], Chapter IX,§2, has the advantage
that it makes it clear that the morphism ψ
ω : O
/CQ
T Z
⊗Zp F→ ωE |
/CQ
T Z
in question is
the composite (at least locally on ˆT Z, but this is suﬃcient for our purposes) of a
morphism — which we shall denote ψ1 —f r o mO
/CQ
T Z
⊗Zp F to a certain rank two
vector bundle on ˆT Z, followed by a surjection — which we shall denote ψ2 —f r o m
this vector bundle onto the line bundle ωE |
/CQ
T Z
(cf. the morphism “Ψ Zp ” — or,
more precisely, its dual — of [Mzk1], Chapter IX, Theorem 2.5). Moreover, the
determinant of ψ1 is equal to 1− ζp times a unit (cf. [Mzk1], Chapter IX, Theorem

24 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
2.5, as well as the proof of this theorem). On the other hand, since the range
of the morphism ψω is a line bundle, it follows that the image of ψω determines
an ideal J⊆ O
/CQ
T Z
with the property that det( ψ1) vanishes modulo J .T h u s , w e
conclude that 1 − ζp ∈J , as desired. Finally, the assertions of Theorem 3.1 over
the ordinary locus and near inﬁnity follow from the theory of either [Mzk3], §2, or
[Mzk1], Chapter IX, §2. This completes the proof ⃝
Remark. Usually, in the context of p-adic Hodge theory, one constructs the p-adic
period map not overglobal basessuch as MZ, but overp-adic bases,s u c ha sMZp .I t
is immediate, however, from the ﬁrst approach discussed in the proof of Theorem 3.1
to constructing thep-adic period map thatexactly the same construction works over
MZ and gives rise to a morphism that isequivariant with respect toΠMQ = π1(MQ)
(i.e., not just π1(MQp )). (The author wishes to thank A. Tamagawa for remarks
that led to a simpliﬁcation of the proof of Theorem 3.1.)
Remark. Thus, in particular, we obtain thatif E is a log elliptic curve overZ,t h e n
(by pull-back via the classifying morphism to M1,0 deﬁned by E) the morphism ψω
deﬁnes a Gal(Q/Q)-equivariant morphism:
ψω(E): Tp(E) ⊗Zp O
/CQ
Q → ωE ⊗OF O
/CQ
Q
(where Tp(E)i st h ep-adic Tate module of E; Q is an algebraic closure of Q;a n d
the “hat” denotes p-adic completion) whose image contains p · ωE (cf. Theorems
3.1, 3.2). In particular, since the completions of Q at each of its primes over p are
all valuation rings, we thus conclude that ψω(E) deﬁnes a Gal( Q/Q)-equivariant
surjection
ψ′
ω(E): Tp(E) ⊗Zp O
/CQ
Q → ω′
E
(where ω′
E ⊆ ωE ⊗Z O
/CQ
Q is a free O
/CQ
Q-submodule of rank one) which coincides with
ψω(E)o v e rQp. Thus, the kernel ofψ′
ω(E) may be regarded as a global generalization
of the multiplicative subspace “Zp(1) ⊆ Tp(E)” of the Tate curveE over Z[[q]].
Section 4: The Group T ensor Product
In this §, we present a very general construction that applies to arbitrary com-
mutative group schemes, but which will be of fundamental importance for motivat-
ing the theory that we wish to pursue in subsequent papers.
We begin with the following deﬁnition, which is motivated by inﬁnite abelian
group theory (cf. [Fchs], p. 94):

GALOIS-THEORETIC KODAIRA-SPENCER 25
Deﬁnition 4.1. We shall call a torsion-free abelian groupR ind-freeif every ﬁnite
subset of R is contained in a ﬁnitely generated direct summand of R.
Remark. It is known that every countable subgroup of an ind-free group is free(cf.
[Fchs], pp. 93-94). Thus, in particular, every countable ind-free group is free.O n
the other hand, groups such as an inﬁnite direct product of inﬁnite cyclic groups
are ind-free, but not free (cf. [Fchs], p. 94). The reason that we wish to consider
ind-free groups is because we wish to allow just such groups — i.e., such as the
additive group of power seriesZ[[q]] — in the theory to be developed in the present
and subsequent papers.
Now let S be a noetherian scheme,a n dG a commutative group scheme over
S. (Note: we do not necessarily assume that G is smooth or of locally of ﬁnite type
over S.) Thus, G deﬁnes a functor
T ↦→ G(T)
from the category of S-schemes (such as T → S) to the category of abelian groups.
Next, let us assume that we are given an ind-free Z-module R (cf. Deﬁnition
4.1). Then let us consider the functor
T ↦→ G(T) ⊗
Z R
— which we denote by G
gp
⊗ R — from the category of S-schemes (such as T → S)
to the category of abelian groups.
Deﬁnition 4.2. We shall refer to as an ind-group scheme an inductive system
(indexed by a ﬁltered set) of group schemes in which the transition morphisms are
all closed immersions.
Remark. Thus, a Barsotti-Tate group (e.g., the p-divisible group deﬁned by an
abelian variety) is a typical example of an ind-group scheme. Note that it is im-
portant to assume that the transition morphisms are closed immersions. Indeed,
so long as one assumes this, taking the inverse limit of sheaves of functions on the
group schemes in the system gives rise to a sheaf of “functions on the ind-group
scheme”which surjects onto the sheaves of functions on each of the group schemes
in the system. If, on the other hand, one considers an inductive system such as
E → E → E → E → E → ...
(where E is an elliptic curve, and all of the arrows are multiplication by some
positive integer d), then the inverse limit of the functions on the group schemes in

26 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
the system contains only the constant functions.T h u s ,it is diﬃcult to treat this
sort of inductive system as a single geometric object.
Proposition 4.3. This functor G
gp
⊗ R is representable by an ind-group scheme
over S, which, by abuse of notation, we also denote by G
gp
⊗ R. Moreover:
(1) G
gp
⊗ R is functorial with respect to G and R.
(2) If R is ﬁnitely generated, then G
gp
⊗ R is representable by a
(single) group scheme.
(3) If R and R′ are ﬁnitely generated free Z-modules, and R↪ → R′
is a split injection, then the resulting arrow G
gp
⊗ R → G
gp
⊗ R′
is a closed immersion.
Proof. First, note that any ind-freeR can be written as an inductive limit lim−→ Rj
of ﬁnitely generated free Z-submodules Rj (for j in some ﬁltered index set J)s u c h
that the injections Rj ↪→ R are split. Moreover, when j<j ′ (so Rj ⊆ Rj′ ), the
fact that Rj ↪→ R is split implies that Rj ⊆ Rj′ is split. Thus, the representability
of G
gp
⊗ R (for a general ind-free R) by an ind-group scheme overS follows formally
from assertions (1), (2), (3).
Let us prove (2), (3). Thus, for the remainder of this paragraph, let us assume
that R is ﬁnitely generated (and free). But then R is (noncanonically) isomorphic
to Zr (for some positive integer r), so G
gp
⊗ R can be represented by the group
scheme G ×S G ×S ... ×S G (the ﬁbered product over S of r copies of G). This
proves (2). Since any split injection Zr ↪→ Zr′
is isomorphic to the injection Zr =
Zr ×{ 0} ↪→ Zr × Zr′ −r = Zr′
, assertion (3) follows immediately.
Finally, assertion (1) follows immediately from the functorial deﬁnition of
G
gp
⊗ R. ⃝
Deﬁnition 4.4. By abuse of notation, we denote the ind-group scheme of Propo-
sition 4.3 byG
gp
⊗ R, and refer to this ind-group scheme as thegroup tensor product
of G with R.
Remark. We shall principally be interested in the case where G is an elliptic curve
E, or its universal extension equipped with some integral structure — e.g., E∗
[d],et
—a n d R is a ring closely related to the base scheme over which E is deﬁned —
e.g., R = OF (the ring of integers) for some number ﬁeld F.

GALOIS-THEORETIC KODAIRA-SPENCER 27
Remark. Note that automorphisms of the module R induce automomorphisms of
G
gp
⊗ R. Moreover, if, for instance, R is ﬁnitely generated,a n dG is equipped with
an ample line bundle L,t h e nany choice of basis e1,... ,er of R determines an
isomorphism G
gp
⊗ R ∼=
∏r
j=1 G, hence (by taking the tensor product of the pull-
backs of L relative to each of the factors in the product),a natural choice of ample
line bundle on G
gp
⊗ R. This ample line bundle, however, depends on the choice
of basis, i.e., it will not be preserved in general by automorphisms of R.T h u s , i n
summary:
Although (for, say, ﬁnitely generatedR) the correspondenceG ↦→
G
gp
⊗ R deﬁnes a natural functor from group schemes to group
schemes, it doesnot deﬁne a natural functor frompolarizedgroup
schemes to polarized group schemes.
Since, in Hodge-Arakelov theory, it is of fundamental importance to work with
polarized group schemes, the rather superﬁcial general nonsense of the present§ will
not be suﬃcient for working with group tensored elliptic curves in Hodge-Arakelov
theory. The resolution of this technical issue forms one of the main obstacles relative
to developing a theory of the sort that the author envisions for globalizing the theory
of §2.
One important property of the group tensor product is the following:
Proposition 4.5. Let d ≥ 1 be an integer, and write
dG ⊆ G (respectively,
d(G
gp
⊗ R) ⊆ G
gp
⊗ R) for the kernel of the morphism [d]: G → G (respectively, [d]:
G
gp
⊗ R → G
gp
⊗ R), i.e., multiplication by d. Then we have a natural isomorphism:
d(G
gp
⊗ R) ∼= (dG) ⊗Z/dZ (R/d · R)
Proof. This follows immediately from the functorial deﬁnition of G
gp
⊗ R. ⃝
Conclusion:
If we formally combine Proposition 4.5 with the content of the second Remark
following Theorem 3.1, we thus obtain the following:
If E is a log elliptic curve over Z; d = pr (where p is a prime
number, and r ≥ 1 is an integer); and R
def
= OK is the ring
of integers of some ﬁnite Galois extension K of Q (which may

28 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
depend on the choice of d), then the rank 2( R/dR)-module of
d-torsion points ofE
gp
⊗ R contains a rank1 submodule stabilized
by Gal(Q/Q) and which coincides with the usual “multiplicative
subspace” at primes of bad (multiplicative) reduction.
In particular, this conclusion suggests that if we could somehow develop a “Hodge-
Arakelov theory for objects such as E
gp
⊗ R,” then we should be able to deﬁne for
such objects a Lagrangian Galois-theoretic Kodaira-Spencer morphism which is free
of Gaussian poles (cf. Corollary 2.5). In subsequent papers, it is the hope of the
author to develop just such a theory.
Bibliography
[BO] P. Berthelot and A. Ogus, Notes on Crystalline Cohomology, Princeton Univ.
Press (1978).
[MB] L. Moret-Bailly, Pinceaux de vari´et´es ab´eliennes, Ast´erisque 129,S o c .M a t h .
France (1985).
[Fchs] L. Fuchs, Inﬁnite Abelian Groups , Volume I, Pure and Applied Mathematics
36, Academic Press (1970).
[Mzk1] S. Mochizuki, The Hodge-Arakelov Theory of Elliptic Curves: Global Discretiza-
tion of Local Hodge Theories, RIMS Preprint Nos. 1255, 1256 (October 1999).
[Mzk2] S. Mochizuki, The Scheme-Theoretic Theta Convolution, RIMS Preprint No.
1257 (October 1999).
[Mzk3] S. Mochizuki, Connections and Related Integral Structures on the Universal
Extension of an Elliptic Curve, RIMS Preprint No. 1279 (May 2000).
[Shi] G. Shimura, Introduction to the Arithmetic Theory of Automorphic Forms ,
Publ. Math. Soc. of Japan 11, Iwanami Shoten and Princeton Univ. Press
(1971).