THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I:
THE GENERAL THEORY
Shinichi Mochizuki
June 2008
/BT/CQ/D7/D8/D6/CP /CR/D8/BA We develop the theory of Frobenioids, which may be regarded as a
category-theoretic abstraction of the theory of divisors and line bundles on models
of ﬁnite separable extensions of a given function ﬁeld or number ﬁeld. This sort of
abstraction is analogous to the role of Galois categories in Galois theory or monoids
in the geometry of log schemes. This abstract category-theoretic framework preserves
many of the important features of the classical theory of divisors and line bundles
on models of ﬁnite separable extensions of a function ﬁeld or number ﬁeld such as
the global degree of an arithmetic line bundle over a number ﬁeld, but also exhibits
interesting new phenomena, such as a “Frobenius endomorphism” of the Frobenioid
associated to a number ﬁeld.
Introduction
§0. Notations and Conventions
§1. Deﬁnitions and First Properties
§2. Frobenius Functors
§3. Category-theoreticity of the Base and Frobenius Degree
§4. Category-theoreticity of the Divisor Monoid
§5. Model Frobenioids
§6. Some Motivating Examples
Appendix: Slim Exponentiation
Index
Chart of Types of Morphisms in a Frobenioid
Bibliography
Introduction
§I1. Technical Summary
§I2. Abstract Combinatorialization of Arithmetic Geometry
§I3. Frobenius Endomorphisms of a Number Field
§I4. ´Etale-like vs. Frobenius-like Structures
Acknowledgements
2000 Mathematical Subject Classiﬁcation: Primary 14A99; Secondary 11G99.
Keywords and Phrases: categories; Galois categories; Frobenius; monoids; log schemes.
Typeset by AMS-TEX
1

2 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
§I1. Technical Summary
In the present paper, we introduce the notion of a Frobenioid. The simplest
kind of Frobenioid “ FM ” is the non-commutative monoid given by forming the
“semi-direct product monoid” of a given commutative monoid M with the multi-
plicative monoid of positive integers N≥1 [cf. §0], where n ∈ N≥1 acts on M by
multiplication by n; that is to say, the underlying set of FM is the product
M × N≥1
equipped with the monoid structure is given as follows: ifa1,a2 ∈ M, n1,n2 ∈ N≥1,
then (a1,n1) ·(a2,n2)=( a1 +n1 ·a2,n1 ·n2) [cf. Deﬁnition 1.1, (iii)]. For instance,
when M is taken to be the additive monoid of nonnegative integers Z≥0 [cf. §0],
we shall write F
def
= FZ≥ 0 and refer to F as the standard Frobenioid. Note that in
general, any monoid [such as FM , for instance] may be thought of as a category,
i.e., the category with precisely one object whose monoid of endomorphisms is the
given monoid.
More generally, one may start with a“family of commutative monoids”Φo na
“base category” D [where Φ, D satisfy certain properties] and form the associated
elementary Frobenioid FΦ by taking the “semi-direct product” of N≥1 with Φ [cf.
Deﬁnition 1.1, (iii), for more details]. Here, FΦ is a category.
In general, a Frobenioid C is a category equipped with a functor C→ FΦ to
an elementary Frobenioid FΦ satisfying certain properties [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3 for
more details] to the eﬀect that the structure ofC is “substantially reﬂected” in this
functor C→ FΦ. From the point of view of conventional arithmetic geometry, a
Frobenioid may be thought of as a sort of a category-theoretic abstraction of the
theory of divisors and line bundles on models of ﬁnite separable extensions of a given
function ﬁeld or number ﬁeld . That is to say, the base category D corresponds to
the category of models of ﬁnite separable extensions of a given function ﬁeld or
number ﬁeld; the functor Φ corresponds to the divisors on such models; the “ N≥1
portion” ofFΦ corresponds to the operation of multiplying a divisor by an element
n ∈ N≥1 [or, if one considers the line bundle associated to such a divisor, to the
operation of forming the n-th tensor power of the line bundle].
In some sense, the main result of the theory of present paper is the following:
Under various technical conditions, the functor C→ FΦ that determines
the structure of C as a Frobenioid may be reconstructed purely category-
theoretically, i.e., from the structure of C as a category [cf. Corollary
4.11].
These technical conditions are typically satisﬁed by Frobenioids that arise naturally
from arithmetic geometry [cf. Theorems 6.2, 6.4]. Also, we observe that these
technical conditions appear unlikely to be superﬂuous. Indeed, we also give various
examples, involving Frobenioids which do not satisfy various of these technical
conditions, of equivalences of categories with respect to which various portions of

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 3
the functor C→ FΦ are not preserved [cf. Examples 3.5, 3.6, 3.7, 3.8, 3.9, 3.10,
4.3].
Perhaps the most fundamental example of this phenomenon of “the intrinsic
category-theoretic reconstruction of C→ FΦ from C” is the following. The proto-
type of a base category D is given by [the subcategory of connected objects of] a
Galois category, i.e., a category in which the monoids of endomorphisms of objects
have the structure of ﬁnite groups. On the other hand, the prototype of the “non-
base category portion”of a Frobenioid, i.e., the “relative structure of C over D”, is
given by the monoid “ F” [or, more generally, the monoids “FM ”] discussed above.
Then one central aspect of the phenomenon that “the relative structure of C over
D is never confused with the structure of D” is illustrated by the following easily
veriﬁed observation:
If G is a ﬁnite group, then any homomorphism of monoids F → G factors
through the natural surjection F ↠ N≥1.
[We refer to Remark 3.1.2 for more details.] Note that this property fails to hold
if, for instance, one replaces F = FZ≥ 0 by Z≥0 [and the surjection F ↠ N≥1 by
the surjection Z≥0 ↠ {0}]. Put another way, this property may be thought of as
a consequence of the non-abelian nature of F. In particular, if one thinks of the
category-theoretic reconstructibility of the functor “ C→ FΦ”a sas o r to frigidity,
then this property is vaguely reminiscent of the “extraordinary rigidity” asserted
by Grothendieck in descriptions of his anabelian philosophy.
After deﬁning and examining the ﬁrst properties of Frobenioids in §1, we pro-
ceed to discuss, in §2, various versions of “Frobenius functors” on Frobenioids,
which are intended as category-theoretic abstractions of the Frobenius morphism
in positive characteristic algebraic geometry [cf. Remark 6.2.1]. In §3, we begin the
category-theoretic reconstruction of the functor “ C→ FΦ” by showing that, under
certain conditions, thebase categoryand “Frobenius degree”[i.e., in eﬀect, the “N≥1
portion of FΦ”] may be reconstructed category-theoretically [cf. Theorem 3.4]. In
the theory of §3, we apply a certain purely category-theoretic technique, which we
shall refer to as “slim exponentiation”; this technique is entirely independent of the
theory of Frobenioids and is discussed in detail in the Appendix. In §4, we then
complete the category-theoretic reconstruction of the functor “ C→ FΦ”b ys h o w -
ing that, under certain conditions, thedivisor monoid Φ may also be reconstructed
category-theoretically [cf. Theorem 4.9]. In §5, we study the extent to which,
under certain conditions, one may write down “explicit models” of fairly general
Frobenioids, in a fashion reminiscent of the explicit description of the elementary
Frobenioid F
Φ [cf. Theorem 5.2]. This study leads naturally to the investigation
of various auxiliary structures on a Frobenioid, namely, base sections and base-
Frobenius pairs, that may be used to relate a given Frobenioid satisfying certain
conditions to such a “model Frobenioid”[cf. Theorem 5.2, (iv)].
One important technique in the theory of §3, §4, §5 is the operation of pass-
ing from a Frobenioid to the perfection or realiﬁcation of the Frobenioid. Roughly
speaking, from the point of view of the monoid F = FZ≥ 0 introduced above, these

4 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
operations correspond, respectively, to passing from “ Z≥0” to the monoids “Q≥0”
[in the case of the perfection] or “ R≥0” [in the case of the realiﬁcation]. Another
important technique in this theory is the operation of passing to the birationaliza-
tion of a Frobenioid. This may be thought of as a category-theoretic abstraction of
the notion of “working with rational functions” in algebraic geometry; alternatively,
from the point of view of the monoidF = FZ≥ 0 introduced above, it may be thought
of as corresponding to the operation of passing from “ Z≥0”t ot h egroupiﬁcation
“ Z”o f Z≥0.
operation
 eﬀect on Z≥0 ⊆ F
perfection
 Z≥0 ⇝ Q≥0
realiﬁcation
 Z≥0 ⇝ R≥0
birationalization
 Z≥0 ⇝ Z
Finally, in §6, we consider the main motivating examples of Frobenioids that arise
from number ﬁelds and function ﬁelds. In particular, we observe in passing that this
“Frobenioid-theoretic formulation of the elementary arithmetic of number ﬁelds”
also gives rise to some interesting “Frobenioid-theoretic interpretations” of such
classical results in number theory as the Dirichlet unit theorem and Tchebotarev’s
density theorem, as well as a result in transcendence theory due toLang [cf. Theo-
rem 6.4, (i), (iii), (iv)].
§I2. Abstract Combinatorialization of Arithmetic Geometry
From a somewhat more conceptual point of view, one central theme of the
present paper is the goal of“abstract combinatorialization of scheme-theoretic
arithmetic geometry”. Classical examples of this phenomenon of “abstract com-
binatorialization” may be seen in the theory of Galois categories or the theory of
monoids in the geometry of log schemes [or, more classically, toric varieties]. That
is to say, even if one starts by considering various ﬁnite ´etale coverings of schemes,
the associated Galois category is a purely “abstract combinatorial” mathematical
object that captures the “Galois structure” of the various coverings involved in a
fashion that is entirely independent of scheme theory. In a similar vein, although
a monoid of the sort that appears in log geometry arises as a submonoid of the
multiplicative monoid determined by some commutative ring, the “abstract com-
binatorial” structure of such a monoid is suﬃcient to capture various essential
properties [such as normality, etc.] of the ring structure of the ambient ring in a
fashion that is entirely independent of ring/scheme theory.
A somewhat less classical example of this phenomenon of “abstract combinato-
rialization of scheme theory” is given by the theory of [Mzk8], where it is shown that
very general locally noetherian log schemes may be “represented” by categories,i n
the sense that equivalences between such categories arise from uniquely determined
isomorphisms of log schemes. The theory of [Mzk8] is generalized in [Mzk9] so as to
take into account thearchimedean primesof log schemes which are locally of ﬁnite

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 5
type over a Zariski localization of [the ring of rational integers] Z. As is discussed
in the introduction to [Mzk8], this kind of result is motivated partly by the an-
abelian philosophy of Grothendieck, but perhaps more essentially by the idea that
instead of working with set-theoretic objects,s u c ha sschemes or log schemes,o n e
should regard categories — which may be thought of as “abstract combinatorial”
mathematical objects constituted by some abstract collection of arrows —a st h e
“fundamental, primitive objects” of mathematics discourse. Thus, Grothendieck’s
anabelian philosophy may be regarded as a“special case”of this point of view, i.e.,
the case where the categories in question are Galois categories
⎛
⎜⎜⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
abstract,
combinatorial
mathematical
objects
⎞
⎟⎟⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
⊇
⎛
⎜⎜⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
categories
— i.e., abstract
collections
of arrows
⎞
⎟⎟⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
⊇
⎛
⎜⎜⎜
⎜
⎜⎝
Galois
categories
⎞
⎟⎟⎟
⎟
⎟⎠
—c f . t h e “absolute anabelian geometry” developed in [Mzk5], [Mzk6], [Mzk7],
[Mzk10], [Mzk11], [Mzk12], [Mzk14].
One important drawback of the “anabelian branch” of this category-theoretic
approach to mathematics is that although it is very well-suited to capturing essential
aspects of the geometry of schemes at nonarchimedean primes,i ti s ill-suited to
capturing the archimedean aspectsof the geometry of schemes, and, in particular,
those aspects of theglobal geometryof schemes over number ﬁelds — such asheights
— that are of interest in Diophantine geometry. Thus, from this point of view,
the extension given in [Mzk9] of the theory of [Mzk8] has the virtue, relative to
anabelian geometry, of providing a natural way to incorporate such archimedean
and global phenomena as the global degree of an arithmetic line bundle over a
number ﬁeld [cf. [Mzk9], Example 5.1] into the above-mentioned category-theoretic
approach to mathematics.
The approach of [Mzk9], however, has the followingfundamental drawback
:T h e
categories of [Mzk9] are quite “large” and “complicated” by comparison to Galois
categories, in the sense that they include a very diverse collection of arithmetic
schemes, by comparison to the ﬁnite ´etale coverings of a ﬁxed scheme. This makes
it relatively easy to reconstruct the original arithmetic log scheme from the category.
On the other hand, this relative ease of reconstruction is a reﬂection, in essence,
of the fact that the geometry of such categories is really not so diﬀerent from the
conventional geometry of arithmetic log schemes. Thus, in other words, one doesn’t
gain very much in the way ofessentially new geometric phenomenaby working with
such categories, relative to the conventional geometry of arithmetic log schemes.
By contrast, the relatively simple structure of Galois categories [cf. also the
categories of [Mzk13]] makes it much more diﬃcult to reconstruct the scheme from
the category — indeed, such a reconstruction is only possible in the case of very

6 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
special “anabelian”schemes — but, on the other hand, this diﬃculty of reconstruc-
tion may be regarded as a reﬂection of the fact that there is indeedsome interesting
new geometry that arises from working with Galois categories that does not exist
in the conventional geometry of schemes. Perhaps the most fundamental exam-
ple of this phenomenon is the well-known fact that the absolute Galois groups of
non-isomorphic ﬁnite ﬁelds are isomorphic . Another less elementary example of
this phenomenon is the well-known fact that the Galois category associated to a
nonarchimedean mixed-characteristic local ﬁeld[i.e., a ﬁnite extension of the p-adic
number ﬁeld] admits self-equivalences [i.e., the associated absolute Galois group
admits automorphisms] that do not arise from scheme theory [i.e., from an isomor-
phism of ﬁelds — cf., e.g., [NSW], p. 674].
Put another way, the diﬀerence between the“geometry of categories”— i.e., the
approach to arithmetic geometry constituted by working with the strictly category-
theoretic properties of categories — and the classical approach to arithmetic geom-
etry constituted by working withset-theoretic objects equipped with various compli-
cated auxiliary structures may be regarded as analogous to the diﬀerence between
working with the notion of an abstract group and working with groups of explicit
matrices. That is to say, working with strictly group-theoretic properties of abstract
groups allows one to contemplate various structures that are common to various
distinct groups of explicit matrices, but which are not so evident if one happens
to be ignorant of the notion of an “abstract group” and hence obliged to restrict
oneself to manipulations involving explicit matrices.
This state of aﬀairs prompts the following question:
Can one perhaps represent certain special arithmetic log schemes of inter-
est by categories whose“level of complexity” is closer to Galois categories
[i.e., substantially simpler than the categories of [Mzk9]] — thus allowing
one to hope that the geometry of such categories exhibits fundamentally
new phenomena that do not appear in the conventional geometry of arith-
metic log schemes — on the one hand, but which nevertheless allow one
to work naturally with archimedean primes and heights on the other?
This sort of question constituted one of the principal motivations for the author to
develop the theory discussed in the present paper.
The answer to the above question constituted by the theory of present paper
is, in a word, the notion of a Frobenioid. From the point of view of the question
posed above:
Frobenioids provide a single framework [cf. the notion of a “Galois cate-
gory”; the role of monoids in log geometry] that allows one to capture the
essential aspects ofboth the Galois and the divisor theory of number ﬁelds,
on the one hand, and function ﬁelds , on the other, in such a way that one
may continue to work with, for instance, global degrees of arithmetic line
bundles on a number ﬁeld, but which also exhibits the new phenome-
non [not present in the classical theory of number ﬁelds] of a “Frobenius
endomorphism”of the Frobenioid associated to a number ﬁeld.

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 7
Here, we remark that thebase categoryD is typically a category that is of alevel of
“simplicity” [cf. the above discussion] that is reminiscent of a Galois category [cf.
also the “temperoids” of [Mzk11]; the categories of Riemann surfaces discussed in
[Mzk13], §2]. Indeed, in the examples of §6, the base category is [the subcategory
of connected objects of] a Galois category. From this point of view, the main
ingredients of a Frobenioid — that is to say, roughly speaking, “Galois” [i.e., the
base category D], “Frobenius”[i.e., “ N≥1”], and“metrics/integral structures”[i.e.,
the family of monoids Φ] — are reminiscent of the theory of the “ring of p-adic
periods”Bcrys of p-adic Hodge theory.
§I3. Frobenius Endomorphisms of a Number Field
From a somewhat less conceptual point of view, one of the main motivations for
the author in developing the theory of Frobenioids came from the long-term goal
of developing a sort of arithmetic Teichm¨uller theory for number ﬁelds equipped
with an elliptic curve , in a fashion that is analogous to the p-adic Teichm¨uller
theory of [Mzk1], [Mzk2]. That is to say, here one wishes to regard number ﬁelds
as corresponding to hyperbolic curves over ﬁnite ﬁelds and elliptic curves [over a
number ﬁeld] as corresponding to the nilpotent ordinary indigenous bundles [on a
hyperbolic curve over a ﬁnite ﬁeld] of [Mzk1], [Mzk2].
In the p-adic Teichm¨uller theory of [Mzk1], [Mzk2], certaincanonical Frobenius
liftings play a central role. Thus, since Frobenius liftings are, literally, liftings of the
Frobenius morphism in positive characteristic, in order to develop an “arithmetic
Teichm¨uller theory” for number ﬁelds equipped with an elliptic curve, one must
ﬁrst have an analogue for number ﬁelds of the Frobenius morphism in positive
characteristic scheme theory. If one starts to consider such an analogue from a
completely naive point of view, then one must contend with the fact that, if, for
instance, n ≥ 2 is a integer, then the morphism
p ↦→ pn
[where p is a prime number] clearly does not extend to a ring homomorphism
Z → Z! That is to say, it is diﬃcult to see how to accommodate such a “Frobenius
morphism for number ﬁelds” within the framework of scheme theory.
On the other hand, if one works withmonoids as in the theory of log schemes,
then such a morphism “ p ↦→ pn” does indeed make sense. Moreover, even if, for
instance, one considers roots π of p, the mapping π ↦→ πn is Galois-equivariant.
Thus, in summary:
One important motivation for the author in developing the theory of
Frobenioids was the goal of developing a geometric framework — i.e.,
roughly speaking, a geometry built up solely from “Galois theory” and
“monoids” —i nw h i c ha“Frobenius morphism on number ﬁelds” may be
constructed.

8 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Once one has constructed such a “Frobenius morphism on number ﬁelds”, the
next step to realizing an “arithmetic Teichm¨ uller theory” consists of construct-
ing a “canonical Frobenius lifting”. Although the construction of such “canonical
Frobenius liftings” lies [well!] beyond the scope of the present paper, we remark
that the ideas that lie behind such a construction are motivated by the [scheme-
theoretic!] Hodge-Arakelov theory of elliptic curves surveyed in [Mzk3], [Mzk4], a
theory in which the theta function on a Tate curve plays a central role. In partic-
ular, in order to construct “canonical Frobenius liftings”, it is necessary to extract
the essential “abstract, combinatorial content” of the scheme-theoretically formu-
lated Hodge-Arakelov theory of [Mzk3], [Mzk4]. In fact, certain aspects of such an
“extraction process” are achieved precisely by applying the theory of Frobenioids,
as is done in a certain sequel to the present paper and [Mzk15] — namely, [Mzk16].
Here, we pause to observe that to pass from the geometry of schemes to, say,
the geometry of Frobenioids amounts to a certain “partial dismantling of scheme
theory”, i.e., to“forgetting” a certain portion of scheme theory. As discussed above,
one wants to execute such a “partial dismantling of scheme theory” precisely in
order toallow the construction of such objects as a“Frobenius morphism on number
ﬁelds” which are not possible within the framework of scheme theory. On the other
hand, if the dismantling process that one executes is too drastic, then there is a
danger of destroying so much of the geometry of scheme theorythat one is not left
with a geometry that is suﬃciently rich so as to allow the further development of
the theory. From this point of view, one of the main themes of the present paper
[and [Mzk15]] consists of verifying that:
The geometry of Frobenioidsretains a substantial portion of the geometry
of scheme theory and, in particular, is suﬃciently rich so as to permit the
execution of many geometric constructions and arguments familiar from
scheme theory.
The centerpieceof this veriﬁcation process is thereconstruction of the functor “C→
F
Φ”, as discussed in §I1. Another aspect of this veriﬁcation process, which may
be seen throughout the theory of the present paper, is the step-by-step translation
of various scheme-theoretic terms and constructions that appear in the theory of
divisors and line bundles on models of ﬁnite separable extensions of a given function
ﬁeld or number ﬁeld into purely category-theoretic language. For instance, one
important example of this “step-by-step translation” is the theory of base sections
and base-Frobenius pairs developed in §5, which may be thought of as a sort of
category-theoretic translation of the notion of the tautological section of a trivial
line bundle [cf. Remark 5.6.1].
§I4. ´Etale-like vs. Frobenius-like Structures
Finally, let us return to the“main result”discussed in §I1, i.e., the reconstruc-
tion of the functor “ C→ FΦ”. One way to think about this result is that it is a
statement to the eﬀect that:

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 9
The structure of a [“permissible”] base category D [e.g., the subcategory
of connected objects of a Galois category]i s fundamentally combina-
torially diﬀerent — indeed, diﬀerent in a category-theoretically distin-
guishable fashion — from the structure of the “Frobenius portion”F of a
Frobenioid.
This phenomenon may be thought of as a sort of fundamental dichotomy between
types of combinatorial structures— i.e., between “´etale-like”structures which
are “indiﬀerent to order”[cf. the ﬁnite groups that as appear as Galois groups in
a Galois category] and “Frobenius-like”structures which are “order-conscious”[cf.
the monoids “ Z≥0”, “N≥1” that constitute the standard Frobenioid F]. One may
also think of “´etale-like” structures as “descent-compatible” structures, whereas
“Frobenius-like” structures are “descent-incompatible”, in the sense that compati-
bility with “descent” may be thought of as a sort of violation of the “order” con-
stituted by “the object upstairs” in the descent operation and the “the object
downstairs”. Relative to the theme of “abstract combinatorialization” discussed in
§I2, the point here is that the diﬀerence between “´etale-like” and “Frobenius-like”
structures is an intrinsic structural diﬀerence, not just a matter of “arbitrar-
ily imposed labels motivated by scheme theory” [such as “base category”, “divisor
monoid”, “Frobenius degree”, etc.]! For more on this fundamental dichotomy be-
tween “´etale-like”and “Frobenius-like”categorical structures, we refer to Remark
3.1.3.
Acknowledgements:
I would like to thankAkio Tamagawa, Makoto Matsumoto, Kazuhiro Fujiwara,
and Seidai Yasudafor various useful comments. Also, I would like to thankYuichiro
Taguchi for inviting me to speak at Kyushu University during the Summer of 2003
on a preliminary version of the theory discussed in this paper.

10 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Section 0: Notations and Conventions
Sets:
If E is a partially ordered set, then we shall denote by
Order(E)
the category whose objects are elements e ∈ E, and whose morphisms e1 → e2
[where e1,e2 ∈ E]a r et h er e l a t i o n se1 ≤ e2.
Numbers:
We denote by
N≥1
the [discrete] multiplicative monoid of rational integers ≥ 1a n db y
Primes
the set of prime numbers. Thus, one may think of N≥1 as the free commutative
monoid generated by Primes.
We shall write:
R>0
def
= {a ∈ R | a> 0}⊆ R≥0
def
= {a ∈ R | a ≥ 0}⊆ R
We shall refer to an element
Λ ∈{ Z, Q, R}
as a monoid type and write Λ>0
def
=Λ ⋂ R>0 ⊆ R,Λ ≥0
def
=Λ ⋂ R≥0 ⊆ R, N
def
= Z≥0.
Also, we shall refer to a monoid isomorphic to [the additive monoid] Λ≥0 as a Λ-
monoprime monoid and to a monoid which is a Λ-monoprime monoid for some Λ
as monoprime.I f M is a Q-monoprime monoid, then we shall write
M ⊗ R≥0
for the R-monoprime monoid obtained by completing M relative to the topology
deﬁned by the ordering on the monoid M.
We shall refer to as a number ﬁeld any ﬁnite extension of the ﬁeld of rational
numbers.
Monoids:
Observe that any [not necessarily commutative!] monoid M may be thought
of as a special type of category, i.e., the category with precisely one object whose
endomorphisms are given by the monoid M.

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 11
Write Mon for the category of commutative monoids[relative to some universe
ﬁxed throughout the discussion]. Let M be an object of Mon; the monoid operation
of M will be written additively. We shall denote by
M ± ⊆ M
the submonoid [which, in fact, forms a group] of invertible elements of M,b y
M ↠ Mchar def
= M/M ±
the quotient monoid of M by M ±, which we shall refer to as the characteristic of
M,a n db y
M → Mgp
the natural homomorphism from M to its groupiﬁcation Mgp.T h u s ,Mgp is the
monoid [which is, in fact, a group] given by the set of equivalence classes of pairs
(a, b) ∈ M × M, where two such pairs ( a1,b1); (a2,b2) are considered equivalent
if a1 + b2 + c = b1 + a2 + c,f o rs o m ec ∈ M, and the monoid operation on this
set is the monoid operation induced by the monoid operation of M.W e s h a l l s a y
that M is torsion-free if M has no torsion elements; we shall say thatM is sharp if
M ± = 0; we shall say that M is integral if the natural map M → Mgp is injective;
we shall say that M is saturated if every a ∈ Mgp for which n · a lies in the image
of M for some n ∈ N≥1 lies in the image of M.
Denote by
Mpf
the perfection of M, that is to say, theinductive limit of the inductive system I∗ of
monoids
... → M
n·
−→ M → ...
given by assigning to each element of a ∈ N≥1 a copy of M, which we denote
by Ia, and to every two elements a, b ∈ M such that a divides b the morphism
Ia = M → Ib = M given by multiplication by n
def
= b/a. Thus, the object I1 of the
inductive system I∗ determines a natural morphism
M → Mpf
which is injective if M is torsion-free, integral,a n dsaturated, hence, in particular, if
M is sharp, integral,a n dsaturated. We shall say that M is perfect if multiplication
by any element ofN≥1 on M is bijective. Thus, Mpf is always perfect; M is perfect
if and only if the natural map M → Mpf is an isomorphism.
Note that M is saturated if and only if Mchar is. We shall say that M is of
characteristic typeif the ﬁbers of the natural mapM → Mchar are torsors overM ±.
Note that ifM is of characteristic type, thenM is integral if and only ifMchar is. If
φ : M1 → M2 is a morphism of Mon, then we shall say that φ is characteristically
injective if φ is injective, and, moreover, the morphism Mchar
1 → Mchar
2 induced by
φ is injective.

12 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Now suppose that M is sharp, integral,a n dsaturated.I f a, b ∈ M,t h e nw e
shall write
a ≤ b
if ∃ c ∈ M such that a + c = b and
a ≼ b
if ∃n ∈ N≥1 such that a ≤ n · b. If a subset S ⊆ M satisﬁes the property that there
exists a b ∈ M such that a ≤ b for all a ∈ S, then we shall say that S is bounded
[by b]. If S ⊆ M is a subset and b ∈ M, then we shall write
BoundS(b)
def
= {a ∈ S | a ≤ b}
[i.e., BoundS(b) is the maximal subset ofS that is bounded byb]. Observe that ifM
is R-monoprime, then every bounded subsetS ⊆ M possesses a [unique] supremum
sup(S) ∈ M
[i.e., S is bounded by b if and only if b ≥ sup(S)]. We shall say that 0 ̸= a ∈ M
is irreducible if any equation a = b + c in M,w h e r eb, c ∈ M, implies that b =0
or c = 0. We shall say that 0 ̸= a ∈ M is primary if for any M ∋ b ≼ a,
where b ̸=0 ,i th o l d st h a ta ≼ b. Denote by Primary( M) the set of primary
elements of M. One veriﬁes immediately that the relation “ a ≼ b”[ w h e r ea, b ∈
Primary(M)] determines an equivalence relationon Primary(M). A ≼-equivalence
c l a s so fe l e m e n t so fP r i m a r y (M) will be referred to as a prime of M. [Note that
this notion of a “prime” diﬀers from the conventional notion of a “prime ideal” of
M.] Denote by
Prime(M)
the set of primes of M.I f p ∈ Prime(M), then we shall denote by
Mp ⊆ M
the submonoid generated by the elements contained in the subset p ⊆ M. Note
that each subset p ⊆ M,w h e r ep ∈ Prime(M), is closed under multiplication by
elements of N≥1,a n dt h a t
Primary(Mpf)= {a ∈ Mpf |∃ n ∈ N≥1 such that n · a ∈ Primary(M)}
Primary(M)=P r i m a r y (Mpf) ⋂M
Prime(M)
∼
→ Prime(Mpf)
[where we regard M as a subset of Mpf via the natural inclusion]. Finally, we
observe that the relation “ ≤”o ne l e m e n t so fM determines a category
Order(M)
[via the partially ordered set structure on M determined by “ ≤”].

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 13
Topological Groups:
Let G be a Hausdorﬀ topological group,a n dH ⊆ G a closed subgroup.L e tu s
write
ZG(H)
def
= {g ∈ G | g · h = h · g, ∀ h ∈ H}
for the centralizer of H in G.
If Π is a proﬁnite group, then we shall write
B(Π)
for the category whose objects are ﬁnite sets equipped with a continuous Π-action
and whose morphisms are morphisms of Π-sets. Thus, B(Π) is a Galois category,
or, in the terminology of [Mzk7], a connected anabelioid.I f ZΠ(H)= {1} for every
open subgroup H ⊆ Π, then we shall say that Π is slim.
Categories:
Let C be a category. We shall denote the collection of objects (respectively,
arrows)o f C by:
Ob(C) (respectively, Arr(C))
The opposite category to C will be denoted by Copp. A category with precisely one
object will be referred to as a one-object category; a category with precisely one
morphism [which is necessarily the identity morphism of the unique object of such
a category] will be referred to as a one-morphism category. Thus, a one-morphism
category is always a one-object category.
If A ∈ Ob(C)i sa n object of C, then we shall denote by
CA
the category whose objects are morphisms B → A of C and whose morphisms [from
an object B1 → A to an object B2 → A]a r eA-morphisms B1 → B2 in C and by
AC
the category whose objects are morphisms A → B of C and whose morphisms (from
an object A → B1 to an object A → B2) are morphisms B1 → B2 in C that are
compatible with the given arrows A → B1, A → B2.T h u s , w e h a v e anatural
functor
(jA)! : CA →C
[given by forgetting the structure morphism to A]. Similarly, if f : A → B is a
morphism in C,t h e nf deﬁnes a natural functor
f! : CA →C B

14 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
by mapping an arrow [i.e., an object of CA] C → A to the object of CB given by
the composite C → A → B with f. We shall call an object A ∈ Ob(C) terminal
(respectively, pseudo-terminal) if for every object B ∈ Ob(C), there exists a unique
arrow (respectively, there exists a [not necessarily unique!] arrow) B → A in C.
We shall say that two arrows of a category are co-objective if their domains
and codomains coincide.
We shall say that an arrow β : B → A of a category C is ﬁberwise-surjective
if, for every arrow γ : C → A of C, there exist arrows δB : D → B, δC : D → C
such that β ◦δB = γ ◦δC. An arrow of a category which is a ﬁberwise-surjective
monomorphism will be referred to as an FSM-morphism. One veriﬁes immediately
that every composite of FSM-morphisms is again an FSM-morphism. A categoryC
which satisﬁes the property that every FSM-morphism of C is, in fact, an isomor-
phism will be referred to as a category of FSM-type.
Let C be a category; A ∈ Ob(C). Write
EndC(A); Aut C(A)
for the monoids of endomorphisms and automorphisms of A in C, respectively. We
shall say that an endomorphism α ∈ EndC(A)o f C is a sub-automorphism if there
exists an arrow φ : B → A of C and an automorphism β ∈ AutC(B) such that
φ ◦β = α ◦φ;w r i t e
(AutC(A) ⊆)A u tsub
C (A) ⊆ EndC(A)
for the subset of EndC(A) determined by the sub-automorphisms ofA.W es h a l ls a y
that A is Aut-saturated (respectively, Autsub-saturated; of Aut-type)i fA u tC(A)=
Autsub
C (A) (respectively, Autsub
C (A) = End C(A); Aut C(A) = End C(A)). If every
object of C is Aut-saturated (respectively, Autsub-saturated; of Aut-type), then we
shall say that C is Aut-saturated (respectively, Autsub-saturated; of Aut-type). We
shall say that an arrow A → B of C is an End-equivalence if there exists an arrow
B → A in C.
We shall refer to a natural transformation between functors all of whose com-
ponent morphisms are isomorphisms as an isomorphism between the functors in
question. If φ : C1 →C 2 is a functor between categoriesC1, C2, then we shall denote
by Aut(φ) — or, when there is no fear of confusion,
Aut(C1 →C 2)
— the group of automorphisms of the functor φ, and by End(φ) — or, when there
is no fear of confusion,
End(C1 →C 2)
— the monoid of natural transformations from the functor φ to itself. We shall say
that φ is rigid if Aut(φ) is trivial. A category C will be called slim if the natural
functor CA →C is rigid, for every A ∈ Ob(C). We recall that if Π is a proﬁnite

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 15
group, then Π is slim if and only if the category B(Π) is slim [cf. [Mzk7], Corollary
1.1.6].
A diagram of functors between categories will be called 1 -commutative if the
various composite functors in question areisomorphic. When such a diagram “com-
mutes in the literal sense” we shall say that it 0-commutes. Note that when a dia-
gram in which the various composite functors are allrigid “1-commutes”, it follows
from the rigidity hypothesis that any isomorphism between the composite functors
in question is necessarily unique. Thus, to state that such a diagram 1-commutes
does not result in any “loss of information” by comparison to the datum of aspeciﬁc
isomorphism between the various composites in question.
A category C will be called askeleton if any two isomorphic objects ofC are, in
fact, equal. A skeletal subcategory of a category C is a full subcategory S⊆C such
that S is a skeleton, and, moreover, the inclusion functor S ↪→C is an equivalence
of categories.
We shall say that a nonempty [i.e., non-initial] object A ∈ Ob(C)i s connected
if it is not isomorphic to the coproduct of two nonempty objects ofC.W es h a l ls a y
that an object A ∈ Ob(C)i s mobile if there exists an object B ∈ Ob(C) such that
the set HomC(A, B)h a scardinality ≥ 2 [i.e., the diagonal from this set to the prod-
uct of this set with itself is not bijective]. We shall say that an object A ∈ Ob(C)
is quasi-connectedif it is either immobile [i.e., not mobile] or connected. Thus, con-
nected objects are always quasi-connected. We shall say that a categoryC is totally
(respectively, almost totally) epimorphic if every morphism in C whose domain is
arbitrary (respectively, nonempty) and whose codomain is arbitrary (respectively,
connected)i sa n epimorphism.
We shall say that C is of ﬁnitely (respectively, countably) connected typeif it is
closed under formation of ﬁnite (respectively, countable) coproducts; every object of
C is a coproduct of a ﬁnite (respectively, countable) collection of connected objects;
and, moreover, all ﬁnite (respectively, countable) coproducts ∐Ai in the category
satisfy the condition that the natural map
∐
HomC(B,A i) → HomC(B,
∐
Ai)
is bijective, for all connected B ∈ Ob(C). If C is of ﬁnitely or countably connected
type, then every nonempty object of C is mobile; in particular, a nonempty object
of C is connected if and only if it is quasi-connected.
If a mobile object A ∈ Ob(C) satisﬁes the condition that every morphism in C
whose domain is nonempty and whose codomain is A is an epimorphism,t h e nA
is connected. [Indeed, C1
∐C2
∼
→ A,w h e r eC1, C2 are nonempty, implies that the
composite map
HomC(A, B) ↪→ HomC(A, B) × HomC(A, B) ↪→ HomC(C1,B ) × HomC(C2,B )
= HomC(C1
∐
C2,B )
∼
→ HomC(A, B)
is bijective, for all B ∈ Ob(C).] In particular, it follows that if C is a totally
epimorphic category, then every object of C is quasi-connected.

16 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
If C is a category of ﬁnitely or countably connected type, then we shall write
C0 ⊆C
for thefull subcategoryof connected objects. [Note, however, that in general, objects
of C0 are not necessarily connected—o re v e nquasi-connected— as objects of C0!]
On the other hand, if, in addition, C is almost totally epimorphic,t h e nC0 is totally
epimorphic [so every object of C is quasi-connected].
If C is a category, then we shall write
C⊥ (respectively, C⊤)
for the category formed from C by taking arbitrary “formal” [possibly empty] ﬁnite
(respectively, countable) coproducts of objects in C. That is to say, we deﬁne the
“Hom” of C⊥ (respectively, C⊤) by the following formula:
Hom(
∐
i
Ai,
∐
j
Bj)
def
=
∏
i
∐
j
HomC(Ai,B j)
[where the Ai, Bj are objects of C]. Thus, C⊥ (respectively, C⊤)i sa category
of ﬁnitely (respectively, countably) connected type . Note that objects of C deﬁne
connected objects of C⊥ or C⊤. Moreover, there are natural [up to isomorphism]
equivalences of categories
(C⊥ )0 ∼
→C ;( C⊤)0 ∼
→C ;( D0)⊥ ∼
→D ;( E0)⊤ ∼
→E
for D (respectively, E)a category of ﬁnitely connected type (respectively, category
of countably connected type). If C is a totally epimorphic category,t h e nC⊥ (re-
spectively, C⊤)i sa n almost totally epimorphic category of ﬁnitely (respectively,
countably) connected type.
In particular, the operations “0”, “ ⊥” (respectively, “ ⊤”) deﬁne one-to-one
correspondences[up to equivalence] between the totally epimorphic categories and
the almost totally epimorphic categories of ﬁnitely (respectively, countably) con-
nected type.
We observe in passing that if C is a totally epimorphic category,a n d α ◦β
[where α, β∈ Arr(C)] is an isomorphism, then α, β are isomorphisms.
If C is a [small] category, then we shall writeG(C) for thegraph associated toC.
This graph is the graph with precisely onevertex for each object of C and precisely
one edge for each arrow of C [joining the vertices corresponding to the domain and
codomain of the arrow]. We shall refer to the full subcategories of C determined
by the objects and arrows that compose a connected component of the graphG(C)
as a connected component of C. In particular, we shall say that C is connected if
G(C) is connected. [Note that by working with respect to some “suﬃciently large”
enveloping universe, it makes sense to speak of a category which is not necessarily
small at being connected.]

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 17
Given two arrows fi : Ai → Bi (where i =1 , 2) in a category C, we shall refer
to a commutative diagram
A1
∼
→ A2
⏐⏐↓f1
⏐⏐↓f2
B1
∼
→ B2
— where the horizontal arrows are isomorphisms in C —a sa n abstract equivalence
from f1 to f2. If there exists an abstract equivalence from f1 to f2, then we shall
say that f1, f2 are abstractly equivalent.
If C1, C2,a n dD are categories,a n d
Φ1 : C1 →D ;Φ 2 : C2 →D
are functors, then we deﬁne the “CFP” — i.e., “categorical ﬁber product” —
C1 ×D C2
of C1, C2 over D to be the category whose objects are triples
(A1,A2,α :Φ 1(A1)
∼
→ Φ2(A2))
where Ai ∈ Ob(Ci)( f o ri =1 , 2); α is an isomorphism of D; and whose morphisms
(A1,A2,α :Φ 1(A1)
∼
→ Φ2(A2)) → (B1,B2,β :Φ 1(B1)
∼
→ Φ2(B2))
are pairs of morphisms γi : Ai → Bi [in Ci,f o r i =1 , 2] such that β ◦Φ1(γ1)=
Φ2(γ2)◦α. One veriﬁes easily that if Φ2 is anequivalence, then thenatural projection
functor
C1 ×D C2 →C 1
is also an equivalence.
Let C be acategory; S a collection of arrows inC; φ ∈ Arr(C). Then we shall say
that φ is minimal-adjoint to S (respectively, minimal-coadjoint to S; mid-adjoint
to S) if every factorization φ = α ◦β (respectively, φ = β ◦α; φ = α ◦β ◦γ)o f φ in
C such that β lies in S satisﬁes the property that β is, in fact, anisomorphism.I f φ
admits a factorization φ = α ◦β ◦γ in C, then we shall say that β is subordinate to
φ.I f φ is not an isomorphism, but, for every factorization φ = α ◦β in C,i th o l d s
that either α or β is an isomorphism, then we shall say that φ is irreducible.W e
shall refer to an FSM-morphism which is irreducible as anFSMI-morphism.T h u s ,
a category of FSM-type does not contain any FSMI-morphisms.
We shall say that a categoryC is of FSMFF-type[i.e., “FSM-ﬁnitely factorizable
type”] if the following two conditions hold: (a) every FSM-morphism ofC which is
not an isomorphism factors as a composite of ﬁnitely many FSMI-morphisms; (b)
for everyA ∈ Ob(C), there exists a natural numberN such that for every composite
φn ◦φn−1 ◦... ◦φ2 ◦φ1

18 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
of FSMI-morphisms φ1,...,φ n such that the domain of φ1 is equal to A,i th o l d s
that n ≤ N.T h u s ,i fC is of FSM-type, then it is of FSMFF-type. Also, we observe
that [by condition (b)] noendomorphism of an object of a category of FSMFF-type
is an FSMI-morphism.
If C is a totally epimorphic category , A ∈ Ob(C), and G ⊆ AutC(A)i sa
subgroup, then we shall say that an arrow φ : A → B of C is a categorical quotient
of A by G if the following conditions hold: (a) φ ◦γ = φ, for all γ ∈ G; (b) for
every morphism ψ : A → C such that ψ ◦γ = ψ for all γ ∈ G, there exists a unique
morphism ψ′ : B → C such that ψ = ψ′ ◦φ.I f φ : A → B is a categorical quotient
of A by G, then we shall say thatA → B is mono-minimal if the following condition
holds: For every factorization φ = φ′ ◦ζ,w h e r eζ : A → A′ is a monomorphism
such that there exists a subgroup G′ ⊆ AutC(A′), together with an isomorphism
G
∼
→ G′ that is compatible, relative to ζ, with the respective actions of G, G′ on A,
A′ [which implies, bytotal epimorphicity,t h a tφ′ : A′ → B is a categorical quotient
of A′ by G′], it holds that ζ is an isomorphism. Thus, [by total epimorphicity] it
follows that an isomorphism is always a mono-minimal categorical quotient of its
domain by the trivial group.
If C is a category, then we shall say that A ∈ Ob(C)i sa n anchor if there only
exist ﬁnitely many isomorphism classes of objects of AC that arise from irreducible
arrows A → B. We shall say thatA ∈ Ob(C)i sa subanchor if there exists an arrow
A → B,w h e r eB is an anchor. If C is a totally epimorphic category, then we shall
say that A ∈ Ob(C)i sa n iso-subanchor if there exist a subanchor B ∈ Ob(C), a
subgroup G ⊆ AutC(B), and a morphism B → A [in C]w h i c hi samono-minimal
categorical quotient of B by G.

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 19
Section 1: Deﬁnitions and First Properties
In the present §1, we discuss the notion of aFrobenioid, which may be thought
of as a category whose internal structure behaves roughly like that of an “elemen-
tary Frobenioid”. An “elementary Frobenioid” is, in essence, a sort of semi-direct
product of the multiplicative monoidN≥1 [which is to be thought of as a“Frobenius
action”] with a system ofmonoids [which are roughly of the sort that appear in the
theory of log structures] on a “base category” [a category which behaves roughly
like a Galois category].
We begin by introducing the fundamental notions of“elementary Frobenioids”
and “pre-Frobenioids”.
Deﬁnition 1.1.
(i) We shall say that M ∈ Ob(Mon)i s pre-divisorial if it is integral [cf. §0],
saturated [cf. §0], and of characteristic type [cf. §0]. Suppose that M is pre-
divisorial. Then we shall say thatM is group-like if Mchar is zero; we shall say that
M is divisorial if M is sharp [cf. §0]. [Thus, if M is pre-divisorial, then Mchar is
divisorial.] If α is an endomorphism of a pre-divisorial monoidM ∈ Ob(Mon), then
we shall say that α is non-dilating if the endomorphism αchar of Mchar induced by
α is the identity endomorphism ofMchar whenever αchar(a) ≼ a for all primary [cf.
§0] a ∈ Mchar.
(ii) Let D be a category. Then we shall refer to a contravariant functor
Φ: D→ Mon
as a monoid on D if the following conditions are satisﬁed: (a) every morphism of
monoids α∗ :Φ ( A) → Φ(B) induced by a morphism α : B → A of D is char-
acteristically injective [cf. §0]; (b) if α is an FSM-morphism [cf. §0] of D,t h e n
α∗ :Φ ( A) → Φ(B)i sa n isomorphism of monoids. If, moreover, every monoid
Φ(A)[ a sA ranges over the objects of D] (respectively, some monoid Φ(A)[ w h e r e
A ∈ Ob(D)]) satisﬁes some property of monoids [e.g., is pre-divisorial, sharp, etc.],
then we shall say that Φ (respectively, A) satisﬁes this property. Note that if Φ
is a monoid on D, then Φ determines monoids “Φ char”, “Φ gp”, Φpf”o n D [i.e.,
by assigning A ↦→ Φ(A)char, A ↦→ Φ(A)gp, A ↦→ Φ(A)pf], which we shall refer to,
respectively, as the characteristic, groupiﬁcation,a n dperfection of Φ. If Φ is pre-
divisorial, then we shall say that Φ is non-dilating if the endomorphisms of Φ(A),
where A ∈ Ob(D), induced by endomorphisms ∈ EndD(A) are non-dilating.
(iii) Let Φ be a monoid on a category D. Then we shall refer to as theelemen-
tary Frobenioid associated toΦ the category
FΦ

20 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
deﬁned as follows: The objects of FΦ are the objects of D.I f A, B ∈ Ob(FΦ), whose
respective images in D we denote byAD,B D ∈ Ob(D), then amorphism φ : A → B
of FΦ is deﬁned to be a collection of data
(φD,Z φ,n φ)
where φD : AD → BD is a morphism of D; Zφ ∈ Φ(AD); nφ ∈ N≥1. Here,
φD (respectively, AD) will be referred to as the projection Base(φ) (respectively,
Base(A)) of φ (respectively, A)t o D; Zφ as the zero divisor Div(φ)o f φ;a n dnφ as
the Frobenius degreedegFr(φ)o f φ.I f CD
def
= Base(C) ∈ Ob(D), then the composite
of two morphisms
φ =( φD,Z φ,n φ): A → B; ψ =( ψD,Z ψ ,n ψ ): B → C
is given as follows:
ψ ◦φ =( ψD ◦φD,φ∗
D(Zψ )+ nψ · Zφ,n ψ · nφ): A → C
Observe that the assignment Φ ↦→ FΦ is functorial with respect to homomorphisms
of functors [on D] valued in monoids Φ → Φ′; also, we have a natural projection
functor:
FΦ →D
We shall refer to the D as the base categoryof FΦ.I f M ∈ Ob(Mon), then observe
that the elementary Frobenioid FΦM associated to the functor Φ M on any one-
morphism [cf. §0] category that assigns to the unique object of the category the
monoid M is itself a one-object [cf. §0] category, whose endomorphism monoid
we shall denote by FM and refer to as the elementary Frobenioid associated to
M. [Thus, the notation “ F□” denotes a category (respectively, monoid) when the
subscript “ □” is a functor (respectively, monoid).] More explicitly, the underlying
set of FM is the product
M × N≥1
equipped with the monoid structure is given as follows: ifa1,a2 ∈ M, n1,n2 ∈ N≥1,
then (a1,n1) · (a2,n2)=( a1 + n1 · a2,n1 · n2). Also, we shall write F
def
= FZ≥ 0 and
refer to F as the standard Frobenioid.
(iv) Let D,Φ , FΦ be as in (iii);C a category. Assume further that Φ isdivisorial,
and that C, D are connected, totally epimorphic categories [cf. §0]. Then we shall
refer to a [covariant] functor
C→ FΦ
as a pre-Frobenioid structureon C. The natural projection functor FΦ →D thus
restricts to a natural projection functor
C→D
on C; similarly, the operations “Base( −)”, “Div(−)”, “degFr(−)” on FΦ restrict to
operations on C which [by abuse of notation] we shall denote by the same notation.

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 21
We shall refer to the D as the base category of C. By abuse of notation, we shall
often regard Φ as a functor on C [i.e., by composing the original functor Φ with
the natural projection functor C→D ] and apply similar terminology to objects
of C and “Φ as a functor on C” to the terminology applied to objects of D and
“Φ as a functor on D” [cf. (ii)]. We shall refer to a category C equipped with a
pre-Frobenioid structure C→ FΦ as a pre-Frobenioidand to the monoid Φ as the
divisor monoid of the pre-Frobenioid.
Remark 1.1.1. If φ ◦ψ is a composite of morphisms φ, ψ of a pre-Frobenioid,
then the operations “Base( −)”, “Div(−)”, “degFr(−)” behave in the following way
under composition:
Base(φ ◦ψ) = Base(φ) ◦Base(ψ)
Div(φ ◦ψ) = (Base(ψ))∗(Div(φ)) + degFr(φ) · Div(ψ)
degFr(φ ◦ψ)=d e gFr(φ) · degFr(ψ)
Indeed, this follows immediately from the deﬁnition of an elementary Frobenioidin
Deﬁnition 1.1, (iii).
Next, we introduce various terms to describe types of morphisms and objects
in a pre-Frobenioid.
Deﬁnition 1.2. Let Φ be adivisorial monoid on a connected, totally epimorphic
category D; C→ FΦ a pre-Frobenioid; φ ∈ Arr(C). Write φ : A → B [where
A, B ∈ Ob(C)]; AD
def
= Base(A) ∈ Ob(D), BD
def
= Base(B) ∈ Ob(D). Then:
(i) We shall say thatφ is linear if degFr(φ) = 1. We shall say thatφ is isometric,
or, alternatively, an isometry,i fD i v (φ) = 0 [cf. Deﬁnition 1.1, (iii)]. If ψ ∈ Arr(C)
is co-objective with φ [cf. §0], then we shall say that φ, ψ are metrically equivalent
if Div(φ) = Div(ψ).
(ii) We shall refer toφas abase-isomorphism (respectively,base-FSM-morphism)
if Base(φ) is an isomorphism (respectively, FSM-morphism [cf. §0]) in D.W es h a l l
refer to two objects of C that map to isomorphic objects of D as base-isomorphic.
We shall refer to φ as a pull-back morphism if the natural transformation of con-
travariant functors on C
HomC(−,A ) → HomC(−,B ) ×HomD(−,BD)|C (HomD(−,A D)|C)
[where “|C” denotes the restriction of a functor onD to a functor onC via the natural
projection functor C→D ] induced by φ is an isomorphism.I f ψ ∈ Arr(C)i s co-
objective with φ [cf. §0], then we shall say thatφ, ψ are base-equivalent(respectively,
Div-equivalent) if Base(φ) = Base(ψ) (respectively, Φ(φ)=Φ ( ψ)). If A = B [i.e.,
φ is an endomorphism], then we shall say that φ is a base-identity (respectively,

22 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Div-identity) endomorphism if it is base-equivalent (respectively, Div-equivalent)
to the identity endomorphism of A.W r i t e
O×(A) ⊆ AutC(A); O⊿(A) ⊆ EndC(A)
for the submonoids of base-identity linear endomorphisms.
(iii) We shall say that φ is a pre-step [a term motivated by the point of view
that the only possibly non-isomorphic portion of such a morphism is the “step”
constituted by a non-zero zero divisor] if it is a linear base-isomorphism. If φ is
a pre-step, then we shall say that it is a step (respectively, a primary pre-step) if
φ is not an isomorphism (respectively, if the zero divisor Div( φ) ∈ Φ(A)o f φ is a
primary [cf. §0] element of the monoid Φ(A)). We shall say that φ is co-angular [a
term that arises from a certain “coincidence of angles” that occurs for co-angular
morphisms in the case of Frobenioids that arise in an archimedean context — cf.
[Mzk15], Deﬁnition 3.1, (iii)] if, for any factorization φ = α ◦β ◦γ in C,w h e r eα is
linear, β is an isometric pre-step, and either α or γ is a base-isomorphism, it follows
that β is an isomorphism. We shall say that φ is LB-invertible [i.e., “line bundle-
invertible”— a term motivated by the isomorphism induced by such a morphism
between the “image line bundle of the domain” and “the line bundle portion of the
codomain” in the case of various Frobenioids that arise from arithmetic geometry]
if it is co-angular and isometric. We shall say that φ is a morphism of Frobenius
type [a term motivated by the fact that, in the case of Frobenioids that arise from
arithmetic geometry, such a morphism corresponds to simply “raising to the n-th
tensor power” for somen ∈ N≥1]i fφis anLB-invertible base-isomorphism.W e s h a l l
say that φ is a prime-Frobenius morphism, or, alternatively, a degFr(φ)-Frobenius
morphism, if it is a morphism of Frobenius type such that deg Fr(φ) ∈ Primes [cf.
§0].
(iv) AFrobenius-ample objectof C is deﬁned to be an objectC such that for any
n ∈ N≥1, C admits an endomorphism of Frobenius degree n.A Frobenius-trivial
object of C is deﬁned to be an object C such that there exists a homomorphism
of monoids ζ : N≥1 → EndC(C) which satisﬁes the following properties: (a) the
composite of ζ with the map to N≥1 given by the Frobenius degree is the identity
on N≥1; (b) the endomorphisms in the image ofζare base-identity endomorphisms
of Frobenius type. A Div -Frobenius-trivial object of C is deﬁned to be an object
C such that there exists a homomorphism of monoids ζ : N≥1 → EndC(C)w h i c h
satisﬁes the following properties: (a) the composite of ζ with the map to N≥1
given by the Frobenius degree is the identity on N≥1; (b) the endomorphisms in
the image of ζ are Div-identity endomorphisms of Frobenius type. A universally
Div-Frobenius-trivial object of C is deﬁned to be an object C such that for every
pull-back morphism C′ → C of C, it follows that C′ is a Div-Frobenius-trivial
object. A quasi-Frobenius-trivial objectof C is deﬁned to be an object C such that
for any n ∈ N≥1, C admits a base-identity endomorphism [which is not necessarily
of Frobenius type!] of Frobenius degree n.A sub-quasi-Frobenius-trivial objectof C
is deﬁned to be an object C such that there exists a co-angular pre-step D → C in
C such that D is quasi-Frobenius trivial. A metrically trivial object of C is deﬁned
to be an object C such that for any co-angular pre-step C → D, it holds that

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 23
D is isomorphic to C.A base-trivial object of C is deﬁned to be an object C
such that any object D ∈ Ob(C) such that Base(C) ∼= Base(D) [in D] is, in fact,
isomorphic to C.A n A u t-ample (respectively, Autsub-ample; End-ample) object
of C is deﬁned to be an object C such that, if we write CD
def
= Base( C), then
the natural map Aut C(C) → AutD(CD) (respectively, Autsub
C (C) → Autsub
D (CD);
EndC(C) → EndD(CD)) is surjective. Aperfect objectof C is deﬁned to be an object
C such that for every n ∈ N≥1, it holds that every B ∈ Ob(C) base-isomorphic to
C appears as the codomain of a morphism of Frobenius type of Frobenius degree
n, and, moreover, for every pair of morphisms of Frobenius type φ1 : B1 → B′
1,
φ2 : B2 → B′
2 of Frobenius degree n,w h e r eB1, B2 are base-isomorphic to C,a n d
every pre-step ψ′ : B′
1 → B′
2, there exists a unique pre-step ψ : B1 → B2 such that
ψ′ ◦φ1 = φ2 ◦ψ.A group-like object of C is deﬁned to be an object C such that
Φ(C) = 0 [or, equivalently, Φ(C) is group-like — cf. the conventions of Deﬁnition
1.1, (i), (ii), (iv)]. A Frobenius-compact objectof C is deﬁned to be an object C
such that O×(C)i s commutative, O×(C)pf ̸= 0, and every element of AutC(C)t h a t
acts on O×(C)pf via multiplication by an element ∈ Q>0 in fact acts trivially on
O×(C)pf.A Frobenius-normalized object of C is deﬁned to be an object C such
that if φ ∈ EndC(C) is a base-identity endomorphism of Frobenius degreed ∈ N≥1,
and α ∈O ⊿(C), then αd ◦φ = φ ◦α.A unit-trivial object of C is deﬁned to be
an object C such that O×(C)= {1}.A n isotropic object [a term motivated by the
archimedeancase — cf. [Mzk15], Deﬁnition 3.1, (iii)] of C is deﬁned to be an object
C such that any isometric pre-step C → D in C is, in fact, an isomorphism.W e
shall write
Cistr ⊆C
for the full subcategory of isotropic objectsand
Clin ⊆C ; Cbs-iso ⊆C ; Cpl-bk ⊆C
for thesubcategoriesdetermined, respectively, by thelinear morphisms, base-isomor-
phisms,a n dpull-back morphisms. We shall say that φ : A → B is an isotropic hull
[of A]i fφis an isometric pre-step,B is isotropic, and for every morphismγ : A → C,
where C is isotropic, there exists a unique morphismβ : B → C such that γ = β◦φ.
A Frobenius-isotropic objectof C is deﬁned to be an object C such that there exists
a morphism of Frobenius type C → D such that D is isotropic.
(v) If every object ofC is Frobenius-ample (respectively, Frobenius-trivial; Div-
Frobenius-trivial; universally Div-Frobenius-trivial; quasi-Frobenius-trivial; sub-
quasi-Frobenius-trivial; metrically trivial; base-trivial; Aut-ample; Aut sub-ample;
End-ample; perfect; group-like; Frobenius-compact; Frobenius-normalized; unit-
trivial; isotropic; Frobenius-isotropic), then we shall say that the pre-Frobenioid
C→ F
Φ is of Frobenius-ample type (respectively, of Frobenius-trivial type; of Div-
Frobenius-trivial type; of universally Div-Frobenius-trivial type; of quasi-Frobenius-
trivial type; of sub-quasi-Frobenius-trivial type; of metrically trivial type ; of base-
trivial type; of Aut-ample type; of Autsub-ample type; of End-ample type; of perfect
type; of group-like type; of Frobenius-compact type; of Frobenius-normalized type; of
unit-trivial type; of isotropic type; of Frobenius-isotropic type).

24 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Remark 1.2.1. The following implications follow formally from the deﬁnitions:
pull-back morphism which is a base-isomorphism ⇐⇒ isomorphism
base-trivial =⇒ metrically trivial
base-identity =⇒ Div-identity
universally Div-Frobenius-trivial =⇒ Div-Frobenius-trivial
We are now ready to deﬁne the notion of a “Frobenioid”.
Deﬁnition 1.3. Let D,Φ , C→ FΦ be as in Deﬁnition 1.2. Then we shall say
that the pre-Frobenioid C→ FΦ [i.e., C equipped with this functor] is a Frobenioid
if the following conditions are satisﬁed:
(i) (Surjectivity to the Base Category via Pull-back Morphisms) (a) Every iso-
morphism class of D arises as the image via the natural projection functor C→D
of an isomorphism class of a Frobenius-trivial object of C.( b ) I f A, B ∈ Ob(C),
AD
def
= Base(A), BD
def
= Base(B), and α : AD
∼
→ BD is an isomorphism, then there
exist pre-steps φ : C → A, ψ : C → B such that α =B a s e (ψ) ◦Base(φ)−1.( c )F o r
every A ∈ Ob(C), the fully faithful [cf. the isomorphism of functors appearing in
the deﬁnition of a “pull-back morphism” given in Deﬁnition 1.2, (ii)] functor
Cpl-bk
A
def
=( Cpl-bk)A →D AD
[where AD
def
= Base(A)] determined by the natural projection functor C→D is an
equivalence of categories[cf. §0].
(ii) (Surjectivity to N≥1 via Morphisms of Frobenius Type) For every A ∈
Ob(C), n ∈ N≥1, there exists a morphism of Frobenius type φ : A → B in C of
Frobenius degree n;m o r e o v e r ,i fψ : A → C is any other morphism of Frobenius
type in C of Frobenius degree n, then there exists a(n) [unique — since C is totally
epimorphic] isomorphism β : B
∼
→ C such that β ◦φ = ψ.
(iii) (Surjectivity to the Divisor Monoid via Co-angular Morphisms) (a) The
co-angular morphisms of C are closed under composition. (b) If A′ → A is a co-
angular pre-step of C, then any morphism A′ → A is co-angular.( c ) G i v e n a n y
co-angular pre-step φ : A → B, there exists a [uniquely determined] bijection of
monoids
O⊿(A)
∼
→O ⊿(B)
such that O⊿(A) ∋ α ↦→ β ∈O ⊿(B) implies β ◦φ = φ ◦α; moreover, this bijection
depends only [among the bijections induced by the various co-angular pre-steps
A → B] on Base(φ). (d) Denote by Ccoa-pre ⊆C the subcategory determined by the
co-angular pre-steps. Then the natural functors
ACcoa-pre def
= A(Ccoa-pre) → Order(Φ(A)); Ccoa-pre
A
def
=( Ccoa-pre)A → Order(Φ(A))opp

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 25
[obtained by assigning to an arrow φ : A → B the element Div(φ) ∈ Φ(A)a n dt o
an arrow ψ : B → A the element (ψ∗)−1(Div(ψ)) ∈ Φ(A)[ s i n c eψ∗ :Φ (A)
∼
→ Φ(B)
is a bijection — cf. the fact that ψ is a base-isomorphism!] are equivalences of
categories.
(iv) (Factorization of Arbitrary Morphisms) Let φ : A → B be a morphism of
C. Then: (a) φ admits a factorization
φ = α ◦β ◦γ
where α is an pull-back morphism, β is a pre-step,a n dγ is a morphism of Frobenius
type; this factorization is unique, up to replacing the triple ( α, β, γ) by a triple of
the form (α ◦δ, δ−1 ◦β ◦ϵ, ϵ−1 ◦γ), where δ, ϵ are isomorphisms of C. (b) Every
pull-back morphism of C is LB-invertible and linear.
(v) (Factorization of Pre-steps) Let φ : A → B be a pre-step of C. Then: (a)
φ is a monomorphism.( b )φ admits a factorization
φ = α ◦β
where α is an isometric pre-step, and β is a co-angular pre-step; this factorization
is unique, up to replacing the pair (α, β) by a pair of the form (α◦γ,γ−1 ◦β), where
γ is an isomorphism of C.( c ) φ admits a factorization φ = α′ ◦β′,w h e r eα′ is a
co-angular pre-step, and β′ is an isometric pre-step; this factorization is unique,u p
to replacing the pair (α′,β ′) by a pair of the form (α′ ◦γ′, (γ′)−1 ◦β′), where γ′ is
an isomorphism of C.
(vi) (Faithfulness up to Units) Let φ, ψ: A → B be base-equivalent, metrically
equivalent co-angular pre-steps of C. Then there exists a [necessarily unique] α ∈
O×(B) such that φ = α ◦ψ.
(vii) (Isotropic Objects) (a) For every A ∈ Ob(C), there exists a [necessarily
unique, up to unique isomorphism] isotropic hull A → B.( b ) I f A ∈ Ob(C)i s
isotropic, and A → C is a morphism of C,t h e nC is also isotropic.
Remark 1.3.1. Note that it follows from Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (b), (c), that if C
is a Frobenioid, then the monoid O⊿(A)i s commutative, for all A ∈ Ob(C).
Proposition 1.4. (Co-angular and LB-invertible Morphisms) Let Φ be
a divisorial monoid on a connected, totally epimorphic category D; C→ FΦ a
pre-Frobenioid; φ : A → B a morphism of C.T h e n :
(i) Suppose that the codomain of any arrow ofC whose domain is equal toA is
isotropic.T h e nφ is co-angular.I np a r t i c u l a r ,φ is a morphism of Frobenius
type if and only if it is an isometric base-isomorphism.
(ii) Suppose that C is a Frobenioid.T h e nφ is a pull-back morphism if
and only if it is an LB-invertible linear morphism [i.e., a co-angular linear
isometry].

26 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(iii) Suppose that C is a Frobenioid. Then every LB-invertible pre-step
is an isomorphism.
(iv) Suppose that C is a Frobenioid. Then a morphism φ of C is co-angular
if and only if, in the factorization φ = α ◦β ◦γ of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv), (a), the
pre-step β is co-angular.
(v) Suppose thatC is aFrobenioid. Then a morphismφ of C is LB-invertible
if and only if it is of the form α ◦β,w h e r eα is a pull-back morphism,a n dβ is
a morphism of Frobenius type.
Proof. Assertion (i) follows formally from the deﬁnitions of the terms “isotropic”,
“isometric pre-step”, “co-angular”, and “morphism of Frobenius type” [cf. Deﬁni-
tion 1.2, (i), (iii), (iv)]. As for assertion (ii), if φ is a pull-back morphism,t h e ni t
follows from Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv), (b), that φ is an LB-invertible linear morphism.
Now suppose that φ is LB-invertible and linear. Then by applying Remark 1.1.1
to the factorization of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv), (a), the fact that φ is a linear isometry
implies that φ may be written in the form α ◦β,w h e r eα is a pull-back morphism,
and β is an isometric pre-step. On the other hand, since φ is co-angular, it follows
that β is an isomorphism, hence that φ is a pull-back morphism, as desired. As-
sertion (iii) follows from either the uniqueness of the factorization of pre-steps of
Deﬁnition 1.3, (v), (b), or the essential uniqueness of morphisms of Frobenius type
of a given Frobenius degree [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (ii)].
Next, we consider assertion (iv). If β is co-angular,t h e ns i n c eα, γ are co-
angular [cf. assertion (ii); Deﬁnition 1.2, (iii)], it follows from Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii),
(a), that φ is co-angular. Conversely, if φ is co-angular,a n dβ = β1 ◦β2 ◦β3,w h e r e
β2 is an isometric pre-step, then by applying Remark 1.1.1, together with the fact
that D is totally epimorphic [cf. the discussion of §0] to this factorization of β,w e
conclude that β1, β3 are pre-steps, hence that α ◦β1 is linear,a n dt h a tβ3 ◦γ is a
base-isomorphism;t h u s ,t h eco-angularity of φ =( α ◦β1) ◦β2 ◦(β3 ◦γ) implies that
β2 is an isomorphism, hence that β is co-angular, as desired.
Finally, we consider assertion (v). Ifφ = α◦β,w h e r eα is apull-back morphism,
and β is a morphism of Frobenius type, then [since α, β are LB-invertible —c f .
assertion (ii); Deﬁnition 1.2, (iii)] it follows from Remark 1.1.1 that φ is isometric
and from Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (a), that φ is co-angular, hence LB-invertible.N o w
suppose that φ is LB-invertible, and that we have afactorization φ = α◦β◦γ,w h e r e
α, β,a n dγ are as in Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv), (a). By assertion (iv), β is co-angular;
by Remark 1.1.1, β is isometric.T h u s ,β is an LB-invertible pre-step, hence [cf.
assertion (iii)] an isomorphism, as desired. This completes the proof of assertion
(v). ⃝
Remark 1.4.1. We refer to the Chart of Types of Morphisms in a Frobenioid
given at the end of the present paper for a summary of the properties of the base
category projections, zero divisors, and Frobenius degrees satisﬁed by various types
of morphisms in a Frobenioid.

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 27
Proposition 1.5. (Elementary Frobenioids are Frobenioids) Let Φ be a
pre-divisorial monoid on a connected, totally epimorphic category D.T h e n :
(i) FΦ, equipped with the natural functorFΦ → FΦchar,i sa Frobenioid of Aut-
ample, Autsub-ample, End-ample, base-trivial, Frobenius-trivial, Frobenius-
normalized,a n disotropic type.
(ii) There is a natural, functorial isomorphism
O⊿(A)
∼
→ Φ(A)
[so O×(A)
∼
→ Φ(A)±] for objects A ∈ Ob(FΦ).
(iii) If all of the monoids in the image of Φ are perfect (respectively,group-
like), then FΦ is of perfect (respectively, group-like)t y p e .
Proof. Since D is a connected, totally epimorphic category, the fact that FΦ is
as well follows immediately from the deﬁnition of the morphisms of FΦ in Deﬁni-
tion 1.1, (iii); the fact that a pre-divisorial monoid is integral [cf. Deﬁnition 1.1,
(i)]; and the injectivity condition of Deﬁnition 1.1, (ii), (a). Thus, FΦ is a pre-
Frobenioid. It is immediate from the deﬁnitions that assertion (ii) holds, and that
all objects of FΦ are Aut-ample, Autsub-ample, End-ample, base-trivial, Frobenius-
trivial, Frobenius-normalized, and isotropic. Also, one veriﬁes immediately [cf. the
deﬁnition of the category FΦ in Deﬁnition 1.1, (iii)] that a morphism of FΦ is a
pull-back morphism if and only if it is a linear isometry. The fact that FΦ satisﬁes
the conditions of Deﬁnition 1.3 now follows immediately from the deﬁnition of the
category FΦ in Deﬁnition 1.1, (iii), together with assertion (ii) and the “explicit
description”of co-angular morphisms and morphisms of Frobenius type in Propo-
sition 1.4, (i) [which is applicable to all morphisms of FΦ since FΦ is of isotropic
type]. This completes the proof of assertion (i). Assertion (iii) is immediate from
the deﬁnitions and assertion (i). ⃝
One important technique for constructing new Frobenioidsis given by the fol-
lowing result.
Proposition 1.6. (Categorical Fiber Products) Let Φ be a divisorial
monoid on a connected, totally epimorphic category D; C→ FΦ a Frobenioid.
Let D′ be a connected, totally epimorphic category; D′ →D a functor that
maps FSM-morphisms to FSM-morphisms. Denote byΦ′ : D′ → Mon the divisorial
monoid obtained by restricting Φ to D′.T h e n :
(i) There is a natural equivalence of categories
FΦ′
∼
→ FΦ ×D D′
[where the latter category is the categorical ﬁber product of §0].

28 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(ii) The categorical ﬁber product [cf. §0]
C′ def
= C× D D′
equipped with the functorC′ → FΦ′ [obtained by applying “(−)×D D′” to the functor
C→ FΦ]i sa Frobenioid.
(iii) A morphism of C′ is a(n) isometry (respectively, morphism of a given
Frobenius degree; co-angular morphism; LB-invertible morphism; pull-
back morphism) if and only if its projection to C is.
(iv) A base-isomorphism of C′ is a morphism of Frobenius type (respec-
tively, pre-step; step) if and only if its projection toC is. Moreover, the projection
functor C′ →C determines a bijection of monoids O⊿(A′)
∼
→O ⊿(A), for every
A′ ∈ Ob(C′) that projects to A ∈ Ob(C).
(v) A object ofC′ is Frobenius-trivial (respectively,quasi-Frobenius-trivial;
sub-quasi-Frobenius-trivial; metrically trivial; base-trivial; perfect; group-
like; unit-trivial; Frobenius-normalized; isotropic; Frobenius-isotropic)i f
and only if it projects to such an object of C.
(vi) A object of C′ is Aut-ample (respectively, Autsub-ample; End-ample)i f
it projects to such an object of C.
Proof. Assertion (i) follows formally from the deﬁnitions. Next, observe that
the fact that D′ is a totally epimorphic category implies immediately that C′ is as
well; similarly, [in light of the various properties of the natural projection functor
C→D assumed in Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (a), (b), (c)] the fact that D′ is connected
implies immediately that C′ is also connected.T h u s ,C′ [equipped with the functor
C′ → FΦ′ obtained by applying “( −) ×D D′” to the functor C→ FΦ]i sa pre-
Frobenioid. Now assertion (vi) follows immediately from the deﬁnitions; one checks
immediately that the equivalences of assertions (iii), (iv), (v) hold. In light of these
equivalences, the conditions of Deﬁnition 1.3 follow via a routine veriﬁcation. Thus,
C′ is a Frobenioid. This completes the proof of assertion (ii). ⃝
Proposition 1.7. (Composites of Morphisms) Let Φ be a divisorial
monoid on a connected, totally epimorphic category D; C→ FΦ a Frobenioid.
Then:
(i) The following classes of morphisms are closed undercomposition: isome-
tries, base-isomorphisms, base-FSM-morphisms, pull-back morphisms,
linear morphisms, pre-steps, co-angular morphisms, LB-invertible mor-
phisms, morphisms of Frobenius type.
(ii) A morphism of C is a pull-back morphism if and only if it isminimal-
adjoint to thebase-isomorphisms of C. A morphism of C is abase-isomorphism
if and only if it is minimal-coadjoint to the pull-back morphisms of C; alter-
natively, a morphism of C is a base-isomorphism if and only if it is may be written

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 29
as a composite α ◦β,w h e r eα is a pre-step, and β is a morphism of Frobenius
type.
(iii) A morphism of C is of Frobenius type if and only if it is minimal-
coadjoint to the linear morphisms of C. A morphism of C is linear if and only if
it is minimal-adjoint to the morphisms of Frobenius typeof C; alternatively,
a morphism of C is linear if and only if it is may be written as acomposite α ◦β,
where α is a pull-back morphism, and β is a pre-step.
(iv) A pre-step of C is co-angular if and only if it is mid-adjoint [cf. §0] to
the isometric pre-steps.
(v) If a composite morphismφ = α◦β of C is a(n) isomorphism (respectively,
base-isomorphism; linear morphism; pre-step; isometry; co-angular pre-
step; co-angular linear morphism; pull-back morphism), then so are α, β.
If, moreover, the domain of φ is isotropic, then a similar statement holds for
morphisms of Frobenius type.
Proof. Assertion (i) follows immediately from the deﬁnitions for isometries, base-
isomorphisms, base-FSM-morphisms, pull-back morphisms, linear morphisms, and
pre-steps; from Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (a), for co-angular morphisms, hence also for
LB-invertible morphisms and morphisms of Frobenius type. Next, thesuﬃciency of
the various conditions given in assertions (ii), (iii) follows immediately from [deﬁni-
tions and] the [existence of the] factorization of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv), (a). Moreover,
in light of the existence of this factorization, thenecessity of the various conditions
given in assertions (ii), (iii) follows immediately for pull-back morphisms and mor-
phisms of Frobenius type from the essential uniqueness of this factorization [and
the total epimorphicity of C]; for base-isomorphisms from the total epimorphicity
of D; and for linear morphisms from the well-known structure of the multiplicative
monoid N≥1 and the essential uniqueness of morphisms of Frobenius type of a given
Frobenius degree [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (ii)].
In light of Remark 1.1.1, assertion (v) follows for isomorphisms (respectively,
base-isomorphisms; linear morphisms; pre-steps; isometries) immediately from the
fact that C is totally epimorphic (respectively, from the fact that D is totally epi-
morphic; from the well-known structure of the multiplicative monoid N≥1;f r o m
assertion (v) for base-isomorphisms and linear morphisms; from the fact that the
monoid Φ on D is sharp [cf. Deﬁnition 1.1, (i)], together with the characteristic in-
jectivity assumption of Deﬁnition 1.1, (ii), (a)). Now assertion (iv) follows formally
from [the deﬁnitions and] assertion (v) for pre-steps [cf. the argument applied in
the proof of Proposition 1.4, (iv)!]; assertion (v) for co-angular pre-steps follows
from assertion (v) for pre-steps and assertion (iv). To prove assertion (v) for co-
angular linear morphisms, suppose that φ is co-angular and linear. Then observe
that by assertion (v) for linear morphisms, α, β are linear. Thus, by applying the
factorization for linear morphisms of assertion (iii), together with the factorization
of Deﬁnition 1.3, (v), (c) [cf. also Proposition 1.4, (ii); assertion (i) for co-angular
linear morphisms], we may write α = α1 ◦α2, β = β1 ◦β2, α2 ◦β1 = γ1 ◦γ2,w h e r e
α1, β1, γ1 are co-angular linear morphisms,a n dα2, β2, γ2 are isometric pre-steps.

30 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Thus, φ =( α1 ◦γ1) ◦(γ2 ◦β2), which [by theco-angularity of φ] implies that γ2 ◦β2
is an isomorphism, hence [by assertion (v) for isomorphisms] thatβ2, γ2 are isomor-
phisms. Thus, by the co-angularity of α2 ◦β1 = γ1 ◦γ2, we conclude that α2 is an
isomorphism. In particular, it follows that α, β are co-angular linear morphisms,
as desired. Now assertion (v) forpull-back morphisms follows from assertion (v) for
co-angular linear isometries [cf. also Proposition 1.4, (ii)]. Finally, assertion (v)
for morphisms of Frobenius type in Cistr [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (vii), (b)] follows from
assertion (v) for isometric base-isomorphisms, since morphisms of Cistr are always
co-angular [cf. Proposition 1.4, (i)]. This completes the proof of assertion (v). ⃝
Proposition 1.8. (Pre-steps) Let Φ be a divisorial monoid on a connected,
totally epimorphic category D; C→ FΦ a Frobenioid.T h e n :
(i) If the natural projection functor C→D is full, then every pre-step of
C is a linear End-equivalence.I f D is of Aut-type [cf. §0], then every linear
End-equivalence of C is a pre-step.
(ii) Suppose further that C is of metrically trivial and Aut-ample type.
Then a morphism of C is a co-angular pre-step if and only if it is abstractly
equivalent [cf. §0] to a base-identity pre-step endomorphism of C.
(iii) An object A ∈ Ob(C) is non-group-like if and only if there exists a
co-angular step A → B; alternatively, an object A ∈ Ob(C) is non-group-like
if and only if there exists a co-angular step B → A.A l s o , i fA, B ∈ Ob(C) are
base-isomorphic objects, then A is group-like if and only if B is.
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). If φ ∈ Arr(C)i sa pre-step,a n dt h e
projection functor C→D is full, then the fact that it is a linear End-equivalence
follows formally from the deﬁnition of a “pre-step” [cf. Deﬁnition 1.2, (iii)]; the
fullness assumption on C→D . On the other hand, if φ ∈ Arr(C)i sa linear
End-equivalence,a n d D is of Aut-type, then it follows formally that φ is a base-
isomorphism, hence a pre-step, as desired. This completes the proof of assertion
(i).
Next, we consider assertion (ii). If φ ∈ Arr(C)i sa co-angular pre-step,t h e ni t
follows formally from the assumption that C is of metrically trivial and Aut-ample
type that φ is abstractly equivalent to a base-identity pre-step endomorphism of
C. On the other hand, if φ ∈ Arr(C)i s abstractly equivalent to a base-identity
pre-step endomorphism of C [hence co-angular, by Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (b)], then it
follows formally that φ is a co-angular linear base-isomorphism, hence that φ is a
co-angular pre-step, as desired. This completes the proof of assertion (ii). Finally,
we observe that the various equivalences of assertion (iii) follow formally from the
deﬁnitions and the equivalences of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d). ⃝
Proposition 1.9. (Isotropic Objects and Isometries) Let Φ be a divisorial
monoid on a connected, totally epimorphic category D; C→ FΦ a Frobenioid.

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 31
Write Cimtr-pre ⊆C for the subcategory determined by the isometric pre-steps
and
Cimtr-pre
A
def
=( Cimtr-pre)A
for A ∈ Ob(C).T h e n :
(i) Any base-isomorphism φ : A → B of C admits a factorization
φ = α ◦β
where α is an isometric pre-step, and β is a co-angular base-isomorphism; this
factorization is unique, up to replacing the pair (α, β) by a pair of the form (α ◦
γ,γ−1 ◦β),w h e r eγ is an isomorphism of C. Here, φ is isometric if and only if
β is a morphism of Frobenius type ; φ is co-angular if and only if α is an
isomorphism; φ is a pull-back morphism if and only if φ is an isomorphism.
(ii) Any base-isomorphism φ : A → B of C induces a functor [well-deﬁned
up to isomorphism]
φ∗ : Cimtr-pre
A →C imtr-pre
B
that maps an isometric pre-stepC → A to the isometric pre-stepD → B appearing
in the factorizationC → D → B of (i) applied to the composite of the given pre-step
C → A with φ : A → B. Moreover, if φ is a co-angular pre-step,t h e nφ∗ is an
equivalence of categories.I f u ∈O ×(A), then we shall denote by uimtr-pre the
isomorphism class of the self-equivalence of the categoryCimtr-pre
A induced by u and
by
O×(A)imtr-pre ⊆O ×(A)
the subgroup of v ∈O ×(A) for which vimtr-pre is the identity.
(iii) Any pull-back morphism φ : A → B of C induces a functor [well-
deﬁned up to isomorphism]
φ∗ : Cimtr-pre
B →C imtr-pre
A
that maps an isometric pre-step δ : D → B to the unique [up to isomorphism]
isometric pre-step γ : C → A that ﬁts into a commutative diagram
C
γ
−→ A
⏐⏐↓ψ
⏐⏐↓φ
D
δ
−→ B
where ψ is the pull-back morphism that arises by applying the equivalence of cat-
egories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (c), to the arrow Base(δ)−1 ◦Base(φ),a n dγ is the
morphism that arises from the isomorphism of functors appearing in the deﬁnition
of a “pull-back morphism” [cf. Deﬁnition 1.2, (ii)].
(iv) Let φ : A → B be a co-angular linear morphism [e.g., a pull-back
morphism — cf. Proposition 1.4, (ii)]. Then A is isotropic if and only if B is.

32 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(v) Cistr [equipped with the restriction to C of the given functor C→ FΦ]i sa
Frobenioid. Moreover, the functor
C→C istr
that assigns to an object A ∈ Ob(C) with isotropic hull A → Aistr the object Aistr
and to a morphism of objects A → B with isotropic hulls A → Aistr, B → Bistr
the induced [i.e., by the deﬁnition of an “isotropic hull”!] morphism Aistr →
Bistr forms a left adjoint to the inclusion functor Cistr ↪→C , through which
the functor C→ FΦ factors. We shall refer to this functor as the isotropi-
ﬁcation functor . The restriction of the isotropiﬁcation functor to Cistr is iso-
morphic to the identity functor. Finally, the isotropiﬁcation functor preserves
morphisms of Frobenius type , Frobenius degrees, pre-steps, pull-back
morphisms, base-isomorphisms, base-FSM-morphisms, base-identity en-
domorphisms, Div-identity endomorphisms, isometries, co-angular mor-
phisms,a n d LB-invertible morphisms; moreover, all of these properties are
compatible with the inclusion functor Cistr ↪→C [in the sense that an arrow of
Cistr satisﬁes one of these properties with respect to Cistr if and only if it does with
respect to C].
(vi) A morphism of C is an isotropic hull if and only if its codomain is
isotropic, and, moreover, it isminimal-coadjoint to the morphisms withisotropic
domain.
(vii) A morphismA → B of C is anisometric pre-stepif and only if the com-
posite of this morphism A → B with an isotropic hull B → C yields an isotropic
hull A → C.
Proof. Since pull-backs which are base-isomorphisms are easily veriﬁed to be
isomorphisms [cf. Remark 1.2.1], assertion (i) follows immediately from the (es-
sentially) unique factorization of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv), (a); the (essentially) unique
factorization of pre-steps of Deﬁnition 1.3, (v), (b); the fact that co-angular mor-
phisms are closed under composition [cf. Proposition 1.7, (i)]; the deﬁnition of
“co-angular” [cf. Deﬁnition 1.2, (iii)]; the fact that C is totally epimorphic;t h e
essential uniqueness of morphisms of Frobenius type of a given Frobenius degree
[cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (ii)]; and Remark 1.1.1.
Next, we consider assertion (ii). The existence of the functor φ∗ follows for-
mally from the existence of the (essentially) unique factorization of assertion (i).
Now suppose that φ is a co-angular pre-step. Then for any isometric pre-step
β : D → B, there exists a co-angular pre-step ψ : C → D such that
(Φ(β ◦ψ))−1(Div(ψ))) = (Φ(φ))−1(Div(φ))
[cf. the second equivalence of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d)]. Thus, by
applying the factorization of Deﬁnition 1.3, (v), (c), it follows that we may write
β ◦ψ = φ′ ◦α′,w h e r eα′ : D → A′ is an isometric pre-step, and φ′ : A′ → B is a

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 33
co-angular pre-step. On the other hand, since Div(β ◦ψ) = Div(φ′ ◦α′), and β, α′
are isometric, it follows that
(Φ(φ))−1(Div(φ)) = (Φ(φ′))−1(Div(φ′))
— hence [by the second equivalence of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d)] that
there exists an isomorphism γ : A′ ∼
→ A such that φ ◦γ = φ′.T h u s , i f w e t a k e
α
def
= γ◦α′,t h e nβ◦ψ = φ◦α —t h a ti st os a y ,φ∗ is essentially surjective.M o r e o v e r ,
[by possibly replacingφ by ψ] this argument [i.e., the construction, givenβ, φ,o f α,
ψ such that β ◦ψ = φ ◦α] also implies that φ∗ is full. Finally, since every pre-step
is a monomorphism [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (v), (a)], it follows immediately that φ∗ is
faithful. This completes the proof of assertion (ii). Assertion (iii) follows formally
from the deﬁnitions, together with the fact that pull-back morphisms are linear
isometries [cf. Proposition 1.4, (ii)], which implies [cf. Remark 1.1.1] that γ is an
isometric pre-step.
Next, we consider assertion (iv). Let φ : A → B be a co-angular linear mor-
phism.I f A is isotropic,t h e ns oi sB, by Deﬁnition 1.3, (vii), (b). Now suppose
that B is isotropic. Thus, by the deﬁnition of an isotropic hull, it follows from the
existence of isotropic hulls [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (vii), (a)] that there exists a factor-
ization φ = β◦α,w h e r eα : A → A′ is an isotropic hull [hence an isometric pre-step
— cf. Deﬁnition 1.2, (iv)], and β : A′ → B is linear [cf. Remark 1.1.1]. Thus, by
the deﬁnition of “co-angular” [cf. Deﬁnition 1.2, (iii)], we conclude that α is an
isomorphism, as desired. This completes the proof of assertion (iv).
Next, we consider assertion (v). By applying the deﬁnition of an isotropic hull
[cf. Deﬁnition 1.2, (iv)], it follows immediately [from the fact that C is connected
and totally epimorphic] that Cistr is connected and totally epimorphic.T h u s ,Cistr
is a pre-Frobenioid. It is immediate from the deﬁnition of an isotropic hull that the
isotropiﬁcation functor is left adjoint to the inclusion functor Cistr ↪→C ; that the
functor C→ FΦ factors through the isotropiﬁcation functor [cf. Remark 1.1.1]; that
the restriction of the isotropiﬁcation functor to Cistr is isomorphic to the identity
functor; and [cf. Remark 1.1.1] that the isotropiﬁcation functor preserves Frobe-
nius degrees, pre-steps, base-isomorphisms, base-FSM-morphisms, base-identity en-
domorphisms,D i v-identity endomorphisms, isometries,a n dco-angular morphisms
[cf. Proposition 1.4, (i)], hence also LB-invertible morphisms and morphisms of
Frobenius type in a fashion that is compatible [cf. the statement of assertion (v)]
with the inclusion Cistr ↪→C . Since pull-back morphisms are co-angular linear
isometries [cf. Proposition 1.4, (ii)], it follows immediately [in light of what we
have shown so far] from Proposition 1.4, (ii), that the isotropiﬁcation functor maps
pull-back morphisms to morphisms which are pull-back morphisms relative to C,
hence a fortiori, pull-back morphisms relative to Cistr. Finally, in light of Proposi-
tion 1.4, (i); assertion (iv) [cf. also Deﬁnition 1.3, (vii), (b)], it follows immediately
[from the fact that C is a Frobenioid!] that the pre-Frobenioid Cistr satisﬁes the
various conditions of Deﬁnition 1.3, hence that Cistr is a Frobenioid, as desired.
This completes the proof of assertion (v).
Finally, we observe that thenecessity and suﬃciency of the condition of asser-
tion (vi) follow immediately from the deﬁnition of an isotropic hull [cf. Deﬁnition

34 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
1.2, (iv)], the existence of isotropic hulls [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (vii), (a)] and the total
epimorphicity of C;t h enecessity and suﬃciency of the condition of assertion (vii)
follow immediately from the existence of isotropic hulls [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (vii),
(a)], the fact that isometric pre-steps between isotropic objects are isomorphisms
[cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (vii), (b); Proposition 1.4, (i), (iii)], and the following observa-
tion [which follows immediately from Proposition 1.7, (i), (v)]: Given morphisms
α, β, γ of C such that γ = α ◦β, if any two of the three morphisms α, β, γ is an
isometric pre-step, then the same is true of the remaining morphism. ⃝
Proposition 1.10. (Morphisms of Frobenius Type) Let Φ be a divisorial
monoid on a connected, totally epimorphic category D; C→ FΦ a Frobenioid.
Then:
(i) Let φ : A → B be an arbitrary morphism of C. Suppose that α : A → A′,
β : B → B′ are morphisms of Frobenius type, of Frobenius degree d ∈ N≥1.
Then there exists aunique morphism φ′ : A′ → B′ such that the following diagram
commutes:
A
φ
−→ B
⏐⏐↓α
⏐⏐↓β
A′ φ′
−→ B′
In this situation, degFr(φ)=d e gFr(φ′); Div(φ′)= d · α∗(Div(φ)) [where we write
α∗ :Φ (A)
∼
→ Φ(A′) for the bijection induced by applying the functorΦ to the base-
isomorphism α]. Finally, if φ is a morphism of Frobenius type (respectively,
pre-step; pull-back morphism; co-angular morphism; base-isomorphism;
isometry; LB-invertible morphism), then the same is true of φ′.
(ii) Any composite morphism β ◦α of C,w h e r eα is a pre-step,a n dβ is of
Frobenius type, may be written as a composite
α′ ◦β′ = β ◦α
where α′ is a pre-step,a n dβ′ is of Frobenius type such that:
degFr(β)=d e gFr(β′); Div( α′)=d e gFr(β) · β′
∗(Div(α))
[where we write β′
∗ for the bijection induced by applying the functor Φ to the base-
isomorphism β′].
(iii) Suppose that C is of perfect type . Then the monoids in the image of
Φ are perfect. If, moreover, C is of isotropic and Frobenius-normalized type,
then the monoids O⊿(A) and O×(A) are perfect.
(iv) A morphism of Frobenius type withisotropic domain is a prime-Frobe-
nius morphism if and only if it isirreducible [cf. §0]. In particular, if A ∈ Ob(C)
is isotropic, then there existinﬁnitely many isomorphism classes of objects ofAC
that arise from irreducible arrows with domainA.

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 35
(v) A morphism of C is a morphism of Frobenius type if and only if it is a
composite of prime-Frobenius morphisms.
(vi) The Frobenioid Cistr is of sub-quasi-Frobenius-trivial type. Moreover,
every group-like object A ∈ Ob(Cistr) is Frobenius-trivial.
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). Observe that uniqueness follows from the
fact that C is totally epimorphic. Now it suﬃces to prove the existence of φ′ as
desired, ﬁrst in the case where φ is a morphism of Frobenius type, then in the case
where φ is a pre-step, and ﬁnally in the case where φ is a pull-back morphism [cf.
the factorization of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv), (a)]. In the ﬁrst case, since morphisms of
Frobenius type areclosed under composition,w i t hmultiplying Frobenius degrees[cf.
Proposition 1.7, (i); Remark 1.1.1], the existence of a morphism of Frobenius type
φ
′ as desired follows immediately from the existence and (essential) uniqueness of
morphisms of Frobenius type of a given Frobenius degree [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (ii)].
In the case where φ is a pre-step, the existence of a pre-stepφ′ [which, moreover, is
co-angular if φ is] as desired follows immediately from thefactorization of Deﬁnition
1.3, (iv), (a) [cf. also Proposition 1.4, (iv)], together with the (essential) unique-
ness of morphisms of Frobenius type of a given Frobenius degree [cf. Deﬁnition
1.3, (ii)], and the fact that co-angular morphisms are closed under composition [cf.
Proposition 1.7, (i)]. In a similar vein, since pull-back morphisms are LB-invertible
[cf. Proposition 1.4, (ii)], and LB-invertible morphisms are closed under compo-
sition [cf. Proposition 1.7, (i)], the existence of a pull-back morphism φ
′ in the
case where φ is a pull-back morphism follows immediately from the factorization
of Proposition 1.4, (v), together with the (essential) uniqueness of morphisms of
Frobenius type of a given Frobenius degree [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (ii)]. The portion
of assertion (i) concerning “deg Fr(−)”, “Div( −)” then follows immediately from
Remark 1.1.1. Finally, in light of what we have done so far, the fact that “if φ is
a(n) co-angular morphism (respectively, base-isomorphism; isometry; LB-invertible
morphism), then the same is true of φ′” follows immediately from the deﬁnitions;
Remark 1.1.1; the factorization of co-angular morphisms given in Proposition 1.4,
(iv); and the fact that co-angular morphisms are closed under composition [cf.
Proposition 1.7, (i)]. This completes the proof of assertion (i). Now [in light of
the existence of morphisms of Frobenius type of a given Frobenius degree — cf.
Deﬁnition 1.3, (ii)] assertion (ii) follows formally from assertion (i).
Next, we consider assertion (iii). In light of the existence of morphisms of
Frobenius type of a given Frobenius degree [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (ii)] and the equiva-
lences of categoriesof Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d), the fact that Φ( A)i s perfect follows
immediately [cf. Remark 1.1.1] from the fact that A is perfect [cf. Deﬁnition 1.2,
(iv)]. Now suppose further thatC is ofisotropic [so all morphisms ofC are co-angular
— cf. Proposition 1.4, (i)] and Frobenius-normalizedtype. Then by the existence
of Frobenius-trivial objects[cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (a), (b); the isomorphism of Def-
inition 1.3, (iii), (c)], we may assume thatA is Frobenius-trivial. Now the fact that
the monoids O
⊿(A)a n dO×(A)a r eperfect follows immediately from the fact that
A is perfect [cf. Deﬁnition 1.2, (iv), applied to the base-identity endomorphisms of
Frobenius type of the Frobenius-trivial object A]a n dFrobenius-normalized.T h i s
completes the proof of assertion (iii).

36 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Next, we observe that assertion (iv) follows immediately from Proposition 1.7,
(v), and the well-known structure of the multiplicative monoid N≥1 [cf. also Def-
inition 1.3, (ii)], and that assertion (v) follows immediately from Proposition 1.7,
(i); Deﬁnition 1.3, (ii).
Finally, we consider assertion (vi). Let A ∈ Ob(Cistr). Then by Deﬁnition 1.3,
(i), (a), (b) [applied to the Frobenioid Cistr — cf. Proposition 1.9, (v)], there exist
co-angular [cf. Proposition 1.4, (i)] pre-steps α : B → A, γ : B → C,w h e r eC is
Frobenius-trivial.T h u s ,f o rd ∈ N≥1, there exists a base-identity endomorphism of
Frobenius type φC ∈ EndC(C) such that degFr(φC)= d; by assertion (ii) [cf. also
Proposition 1.4, (i)], we may writeφC ◦γ = γ′ ◦ψ,w h e r eψ : B → B′ is a morphism
of Frobenius type, and γ′ : B′ → C is a co-angular pre-step. Moreover, the portion
of assertion (ii) concerning the relationship between Div( γ), Div(γ′) implies, in
light of the second equivalence of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d), that γ′
factors through γ, i.e., there exists a co-angular pre-step β : B′ → B such that
γ◦β = γ′. Thus, if we set φB
def
= β◦ψ ∈ EndC(B), then γ◦φB = φC ◦γ.M o r e o v e r ,
since φC is a base-identity endomorphism of Frobenius degree d,a n dγ is a pre-
step, it follows [cf. Remark 1.1.1] that φB is also a base-identity endomorphism of
Frobenius degreed. Thus, we conclude thatB is quasi-Frobenius-trivial, hence that
A is sub-quasi-Frobenius-trivial, as desired. If, moreover,A is group-like, then [since
Cistr is a Frobenioid — cf. Proposition 1.9, (v)] it follows from Deﬁnition 1.3, (i),
(a), (b), that there exist [co-angular — cf. Proposition 1.4, (i)] pre-steps A′ → A,
A′ → A′′,w h e r eA′′ is Frobenius-trivial. But by Proposition 1.4, (iii), these pre-
steps are isomorphisms,s o A is Frobenius-trivial, as desired. This completes the
proof of assertion (vi). ⃝
Proposition 1.11. (Pull-back and Linear Morphisms) Let Φ be a divi-
sorial monoid on a connected, totally epimorphic category D; C→ FΦ a Frobe-
nioid.T h e n :
(i) Suppose further that C is of Aut-ample and base-trivial type. Then the
natural projection functor Cpl-bk →D is full.
(ii) Suppose further thatC is of unit-trivial type. Then the natural projection
functor Cpl-bk →D is faithful.
(iii) Let φ : B → A be a pull-back morphism that projects to a morphism
φD
def
= Base(φ): BD → AD of D . Then given any α ∈ EndC(A), βD ∈ EndD(BD)
such that Base(α) ◦φD = φD ◦βD, there exists a unique β ∈ EndC(B) such that
Base(β)= βD, α ◦φ = β ◦φ.
(iv) Everyco-angular linear morphismφ : B → A determines aninjection
of monoids
O⊿(A) ↪→O ⊿(B)
which is uniquely determined by the condition that O⊿(A) ∋ α ↦→ β ∈O ⊿(B)
implies α ◦φ = φ ◦β.

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 37
(v) The equivalences of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d), are“functorial”
in the following sense: If φ : A → B is an arbitrary morphism of Clin, α : C →
A and β : D → B (respectively, α : A → C and β : B → D)a r ec o - a n g u l a r
pre-steps such that (α∗)−1(Div(α)) = φ∗{(β∗)−1(Div(β))} (respectively, Div(α)=
φ∗(Div(β))), then there exists a unique morphism ψ : C → D in Clin such that
β ◦ψ = φ ◦α (respectively, ψ ◦α = β ◦φ). Moreover, φ is a pull-back morphism
if and only if ψ is.
(vi) A pull-back morphism φ ∈ Arr(C) is an FSM-morphism (respectively,
ﬁberwise-surjective morphism ; monomorphism; irreducible morphism)i f
and only if Base(φ) ∈ Arr(D) is.
(vii) Let φ : A → B be a co-angular pre-step; ϵ : C → B a morphism. Then
there exists a co-angular pre-stepγ : D → C and a morphism α : D → A such that
ϵ ◦γ = φ◦α. In particular, every co-angular pre-step ofC is an FSM-morphism.
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). Let A, B ∈ Ob(C); AD
def
= Base( A);
B
def
= Base(B); φD : AD → BD a morphism in D.B yt h e equivalence of categories
of Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (c), it follows that there exists apull-back morphismψ : C → B
of C such that ψD
def
= Base(ψ): CD → BD of D deﬁnes an object of DBD that is
isomorphic to the object deﬁned by φD.I n p a r t i c u l a r ,CD is isomorphic to AD.
Since C is of base-trivial type, it thus follows that A, C are isomorphic,s ow em a y
assume that A = C.T h u s ,ψ projects to a morphism ψD : AD → BD of D such
that φD = ψD ◦δ,f o rs o m eδ ∈ AutD(AD). Since C is of Aut-ample type,i tt h u s
follows that δlifts to aγ ∈ AutC(A). Thus, taking ψ ◦γ : A → B yields a morphism
of C that projects to φD. This completes the proof of assertion (i).
Next, we consider assertion (ii). Let A, B ∈ Ob(C); AD
def
= Base( A); BD
def
=
Base(B); φ, ψ: A → B pull-back morphisms ofC that project to the same morphism
AD → BD of D. By the deﬁnition of a “pull-back morphism” [cf. Deﬁnition 1.2,
(ii)], it thus follows formally that there exist base-identity endomorphisms α, β ∈
EndC(A) such thatψ = φ◦α, φ = ψ ◦β. In particular, we obtain thatψ = ψ ◦β◦α,
φ = φ◦α ◦β, hence [again by Deﬁnition 1.2, (ii)] that α ◦β, β ◦α are both equal to
the identity endomorphism of A, i.e., that α, β ∈ AutC(A). But this implies that
α, β ∈O ×(A)= {1},s o φ = ψ, as desired. This completes the proof of assertion
(ii).
Next, we consider assertion (iii). The existence and uniqueness ofβ as asserted
follows immediately from the isomorphism of functors appearing in the deﬁnition
of a “pull-back morphism” [cf. Deﬁnition 1.2, (ii)]. This completes the proof of
assertion (iii). Now since aco-angular linear morphismfactors as the composite of a
pull-back morphism with a co-angular pre-step [cf. Propositions 1.4, (iv); 1.7, (iii)],
the existence of the map “↪→ ” of assertion (iv) follows immediately [cf. Proposition
1.7, (iii)] from assertion (iii) and Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (c); the asserted injectivity
of this map follows from the total epimorphicity of C; the fact that this map is
uniquely determined by the condition given in assertion (iii) follows from the fact
that pre-steps are monomorphisms [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (v), (a)], and the deﬁnition
of a “pull-back morphism” in Deﬁnition 1.2, (ii).

38 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Next, we consider assertion (v). First, we observe that the uniqueness of ψ
follows from the fact that β is a monomorphism [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (v), (a)] in the
non-resp’d case and from the total epimorphicity ofC applied toα in the resp’d case.
When φ is a pull-back morphism [hence co-angular and linear — cf. Proposition
1.4, (ii)], the existence of a pull-back morphism ψ as desired follows immediately
by applying the equivalence of categoriesinduced by the projection functor in Def-
inition 1.3, (i), (c); the deﬁnition of a “pull-back morphism” in Deﬁnition 1.2, (ii);
Proposition 1.7, (i), (v) [applied to co-angular linear morphisms]; and the equiva-
lences of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d). When φ is an isometric pre-step,t h e
existence of an isometric pre-step ψ as desired follows immediately from the equiv-
alence of categories of Proposition 1.9, (ii) [in the “case of a co-angular pre-step”].
When φ is a co-angular pre-step, the existence of a co-angular pre-stepψ as desired
follows formally from the equivalences of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d). In
light of the factorizations of Deﬁnition 1.3, (v), (b), (c); Proposition 1.7, (iii), this
completes the proof of assertion (v).
Next, we observe that assertion (vi) follows formally from the isomorphism of
functors appearing in the deﬁnition of a “pull-back morphism” [cf. Deﬁnition 1.2,
(ii)], together with the equivalence of categories induced by the projection functor
in Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (c) [cf. also Proposition 1.7, (v), for pull-back morphisms].
Finally, we consider assertion (vii). By applying thefactorizations of Deﬁnition
1.3, (iv), (a); Deﬁnition 1.3, (v), (b), it follows immediately that we may assume
without loss of generality [from the point of view of showing the existence of γ,
α with the desired properties] that ϵ is a pull-back morphism,a n isometric pre-
step,a co-angular pre-step,o ra morphism of Frobenius type.I f ϵ is a pull-back
morphism, then it follows immediately [by “pulling back the zero divisor of φ via
ϵ” — cf. assertion (v)] that there exist a pull-back morphism α : D → A and a
co-angular pre-step γ : D → C such that ϵ ◦γ = φ ◦α. Next, observe that if ϵ is
an isometric pre-step, then the existence of γ, α with the desired properties follows
formally from the equivalence of categories of Proposition 1.9, (ii) [induced by φ].
Next, observe that if ϵ is a co-angular pre-step, then it follows immediately from
the second equivalence of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d), that there exist
co-angular pre-steps α : D → A, γ : D → C such that ϵ ◦γ = φ ◦α. Finally, we
consider the case where ϵ is a morphism of Frobenius type. By applying the second
equivalence of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d), it follows that we may assume
[by replacing φ by the composite of φ with an appropriate pre-step A′ → A]t h a t
Div(φ)=d e gFr(ϵ) · x,f o rs o m ex ∈ Φ(A). Thus, [by applying again the second
equivalence of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d)], it follows that there exist a
morphism of Frobenius type α : D → A and a co-angular pre-step γ : D → C such
that ϵ ◦γ = φ ◦α [cf. also Proposition 1.10, (i)]. This completes the proof of the
existence of γ, α with the desired properties. It thus follows formally that every
co-angular pre-step of C is ﬁberwise surjective. On the other hand, by Deﬁnition
1.3, (v), (a), every pre-step is a monomorphism. Thus, we conclude that every co-
angular pre-step of C is an FSM-morphism. This completes the proof of assertion
(vii). ⃝
Remark 1.11.1. Observe that in the situation of Proposition 1.11, (iii), if α is

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 39
a morphism of Frobenius type,a n dβD is an isomorphism, then β is a morphism
of Frobenius type. [Indeed, then β is co-angular by Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (b), and
isometric by Remark 1.1.1.] In particular, it follows [cf. Remark 1.2.1] that [at least
in the case of Frobenioids] “Frobenius-trivial” implies “universally Div-Frobenius-
trivial”.
Proposition 1.12. (Endomorphisms) Let Φ be a divisorial monoid on
a connected, totally epimorphic category D; C→ FΦ a Frobenioid; A ∈ Ob(C);
AD
def
= Base(A) ∈ Ob(D).T h e n :
(i) We have natural exact sequences of monoids
1 →O ×(A) → AutC(A) → AutD(AD)
1 →O ⊿(A) → EndC(A) → N≥1 × EndD(AD)
— where the second arrow in each sequence is the natural inclusion; the third ar-
row of the ﬁrst sequence is determined by the natural projection functor to D;t h e
third arrow of the second sequence is determined by the Frobenius degree and the
natural projection functor to D. If, moreover, A is Aut-ample (respectively, End-
ample; quasi-Frobenius-trivial), then the map AutC(A) → AutD(AD) (respec-
tively, EndC(A) → EndD(AD); EndC(A) → N≥1)i s surjective.
(ii) An endomorphism of A is a sub-automorphism [cf. §0] if and only if it
is an isometric linear endomorphism that projects to a sub-automorphism of
D.
(iii) A sub-automorphism of A is an automorphism if and only if it is abase-
isomorphism.
(iv) Suppose that A is Autsub-ample.T h e nA is Aut-saturated [cf. §0] if
and only if AD is.
Proof. Assertion (i) is immediate from the deﬁnitions. The necessity of the condi-
tions of assertion (ii), (iii) is immediate from Remark 1.1.1. To prove thesuﬃciency
of the conditions of assertion (ii), (iii), it suﬃces, in light of the equivalence of cate-
gories [involvingpull-back morphisms] of Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (c) [cf. also Proposition
1.11, (iii)], and the fact that endomorphisms are always co-angular [cf. Deﬁnition
1.3, (iii), (b)], to observe that any LB-invertible linear base-isomorphism [i.e., LB-
invertible pre-step] is, in fact, an isomorphism [cf. Proposition 1.4, (iii)]. Now
assertion (iv) follows formally from assertions (ii), (iii) and the deﬁnitions. ⃝
Proposition 1.13. (Rigidity and Slimness) Let Φ be a divisorial monoid
on a connected, totally epimorphic categoryD; C→ FΦ a Frobenioid; A ∈ Ob(C);
AD
def
= Base( A) ∈ Ob(D). Suppose further that the category D is slim [cf. §0].
Then:

40 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(i) The composite CA →D of the natural functor CA →C with the natural
projection functor C→D is rigid [cf. §0]. In particular, the functor C→D is
rigid.
(ii) The composite CA → FΦ of the natural functor CA →C with the functor
C→ FΦ is rigid. In particular, the functor C→ FΦ is rigid.
(iii) Suppose, moreover, that every object A ∈ Ob(C) satisﬁes [at least] one of
the following two conditions: (a) O×(A)imtr-pre = {1} [cf. Proposition 1.9, (ii)];
(b) ⋂
n∈N≥ 1
{O×(A)}n = {1}, and, moreover, there exists a co-angular pre-step
B → A [which, by Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (c), induces a bijection O×(B)
∼
→O ×(A)]
such that B is quasi-Frobenius-trivial and Frobenius-normalized. Then the
category C is slim.
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). Any automorphism α of the functor CA →
D determines an automorphism of the composite functor Cpl-bk
A →C A →D .O n
the other hand, this composite functor factors as a composite Cpl-bk
A →D AD →D ,
where the ﬁrst functor Cpl-bk
A →D AD is [by Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (c)] an equivalence of
categories. Thus, we conclude that α determines an automorphism of the natural
functor DAD →D , which is necessarilytrivial,s i n c eD is slim.S i n c eA is arbitrary,
we thus conclude that bothCA →D and C→D are rigid. This completes the proof
of assertion (i).
Next, we consider assertion (ii). Let α be an automorphism of the functor
CA → FΦ. By assertion (i), it follows that the automorphisms of objects of FΦ
[which, by Proposition 1.5, (i), is itself aFrobenioid] induced by α are base-identity
automorphisms.S i n c eΦi sdivisorial, hence, in particular, sharp [cf. Deﬁnition 1.1,
(i), (ii)], it thus follows that all of these automorphisms are trivial, hence thatα is
trivial. Since A is arbitrary, we thus conclude that both CA → FΦ and C→ FΦ are
rigid. This completes the proof of assertion (ii).
Finally, we consider assertion (iii). Let α be an automorphism of the natural
functor CA →C . By assertion (i), it follows that the automorphisms of objects of C
induced by α are base-identity automorphisms, i.e., belong to “ O×(−)”. Moreover,
the functoriality of the automorphisms induced byα with respect to isometric pre-
steps implies that these automorphisms belong to “ O×(−)imtr-pre”. Similarly, the
functoriality of the automorphisms induced by α with respect to base-identity en-
domorphisms implies that, at least in the case ofquasi-Frobenius-trivial, Frobenius-
normalized objects — hence also [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (c)] objects as in (b) of the
statement of assertion (iii) — these automorphisms belong to “⋂
n∈N≥ 1
{O×(−)}n”.
Thus, we conclude that under either of the assumptions (a), (b) in the statement
of assertion (iii), the automorphisms induced by α are trivial. This completes the
proof of assertion (iii). ⃝
Remark 1.13.1. Note that if the hypothesis of Proposition 1.13, (iii), fails to
hold, then it is not necessarily the case that C is slim. Indeed, if M is a perfect

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 41
pre-divisorial monoid,a n dC is a one-object category whose unique object has endo-
morphism monoid equal to the elementary Frobenioid FM [so C equipped with the
functor of one-object categories determined by the natural morphism of monoids
FM → FM char is a Frobenioid, by Proposition 1.5, (i)], then any collection of ele-
ments {αn}n∈N≥ 1 of M ± such that αnm = m · αn for all n, m ∈ N≥1 determines an
automorphism of the natural functor CA →C [which is nontrivial as soon as any
of the αn is nonzero] by assigning to an arrow φ : B → A of C the automorphism
αdegFr(φ) ∈ AutC(B).
One key result for analyzing thecategory-theoretic structure of Frobenioids[cf.
§3] is the following:
Proposition 1.14. (Irreducible Morphisms) Let Φ be a divisorial monoid
on a connected, totally epimorphic categoryD; C→ FΦ a Frobenioid of isotropic
type; φ ∈ Arr(C). Suppose further that D is of FSMFF-type [cf. §0]. Then:
(i) φ is irreducible if and only if φ is one of the following: (a) a prime-
Frobenius morphism; (b) a step such that Div(φ) is irreducible; (c) a pull-back
morphism such that Base(φ) is an irreducible morphism of D.
(ii) φ is a pre-step if and only if it is an FSM-morphism that is mid-
adjoint [cf. §0] to the irreducible morphisms which are not pre-steps.
(iii) Suppose that φ is irreducible.T h e nφ is a non-pre-step if and only if
the following condition holds: There exists an N ∈ N≥1 such that for every equality
of composites in C
αn ◦αn−1 ◦... ◦α2 ◦α1 = ψ ◦φ
—w h e r eα1,...,α n, ψ are FSMI-morphisms [cf. §0] — it holds that n ≤ N.
(iv) Let α ◦β = β′ ◦α′ be an equality of composites of C,w h e r edegFr(β)=
degFr(β′),a n dα, α′ are irreducible.T h e nα is a prime-Frobenius morphism
if and only if α′ is; moreover, degFr(α)=d e gFr(α′).
(v) Suppose further that Φ is non-dilating, and that φ is a non-pre-step
irreducible endomorphism of a non-group-like object A ∈ Ob(C).T h e nφ
is a Div-identity prime-Frobenius endomorphism if and only if the following
condition holds: For every step α : A → B, there exists a non-pre-step irreducible
morphism ψ : B → B′ and a step β : B → B′ such that ψ ◦α = β ◦α ◦φ.
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). Thesuﬃciency of the condition of assertion
(i) follows for morphisms as in (a) (respectively, (b); (c)) from Proposition 1.10,
(iv) (respectively, the equivalences of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d) [cf. also
Propositions 1.4, (i); 1.7, (v)]; Proposition 1.11, (vi)). To verify the necessity of
the condition of assertion (i), observe that it follows formally from thefactorization
of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv), (a), that φ is either a morphism of Frobenius type, a step,
or a pull-back morphism. Thus, by Propositions 1.7, (v); 1.10, (iv); 1.11, (vi), the
irreducibility of φ implies immediately that φ is a morphism as in (a), (b), or (c).

42 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Next, we consider assertion (ii). To verify the suﬃciency of the condition of
assertion (ii), observe ﬁrst that by the factorization of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv), (a), we
may write φ = α ◦β ◦γ,w h e r eα is a pull-back morphism, β is a pre-step, and γ is
a morphism of Frobenius type. By assertion (i) [cf. also Proposition 1.10, (v)], it
follows that γ is an isomorphism; thus, we may assume without loss of generality
that γ is the identity, i.e., φ = α ◦β. On the other hand, it follows formally from
the fact that φ is an FSM-morphism that α is ﬁberwise-surjective [cf. §0]. Next, I
claim that α is a monomorphism. Indeed, write φ : A → B, β : A → C, α : C → B;
let ϵ1,ϵ2 : D → C be such that α ◦ϵ1 = α ◦ϵ2. Then by Remark 1.1.1, it follows
immediately that degFr(ϵ1)=d e gFr(ϵ2), Div(ϵ1)=D i v (ϵ2), hence, by applying the
factorization of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv), (a) [and the total epimorphicity of C;c f . a l s o
Deﬁnition 1.3, (ii), and the equivalences of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d)], we
may assume without loss of generality [from the point of view of showing thatα is a
monomorphism] thatϵ1, ϵ2 are pull-back morphisms.N o w b y “adding the pull-backs
of β∗(Div(β)) via ϵ1, ϵ2” [cf. Proposition 1.11, (v); the equivalences of categories
of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d)], it follows that there exists a pre-step ζ : E → D such
that there exist γ1,γ2 ∈ Arr(C) satisfying ϵ1 ◦ζ= β ◦γ1, ϵ2 ◦ζ= β ◦γ2.T h u s ,w e
have: φ◦γ1 = α ◦β ◦γ1 = α ◦ϵ1 ◦ζ= α ◦ϵ2 ◦ζ= α ◦β ◦γ2 = φ◦γ2. But since φ is
[an FSM-morphism, hence, in particular] amonomorphism, it follows that γ1 = γ2,
hence [by the total epimorphicity of C]t h a tϵ1 = ϵ2. This completes the proof of
the claim. In particular, we conclude that α is an FSM-morphism.
Thus, it follows [cf. Proposition 1.11, (vi)] that Base(α) is an FSM-morphism
of D. Since, however, we are operating under the assumption thatD is of FSMFF-
type, it follows that if α is not an isomorphism, then Base(α)a d m i t sasubordinate
[cf. condition (a) of the deﬁnition of a “category of FSMFF-type” in §0] FSMI-
morphism, which implies [cf. Proposition 1.11, (vi)] that α admits a subordinate
FSMI-morphism [which is also a pull-back morphism]. Since φ, however, is as-
sumed to be mid-adjoint to the irreducible morphisms which are not pre-steps, we
thus obtain a contradiction. Thus, α is an isomorphism, so φ is a pre-step.T h i s
completes the proof of the suﬃciency of the condition of assertion (ii). Next, we
consider the necessity of the condition of assertion (ii). Thus, suppose that φ is a
pre-step. By Proposition 1.11, (vii), φ is an FSM-morphism; by Proposition 1.7,
(v), φ is mid-adjoint to the non-pre-steps. This completes the proof of assertion
(ii).
Next, we consider assertion (iii). By assertion (i), it suﬃces to show that
assertion (iii) holds for each of the three types of morphisms “(a), (b), (c)” discussed
in assertion (i). If φ is an irreducible pre-step, then it follows immediately — by
taking ψ to be a prime-Frobenius morphism of increasingly large Frobenius degree
[cf. Proposition 1.10, (ii)] — that the condition in the statement of assertion (iii) is
false [as desired]. On the other hand, if φ is a non-pre-step,t h e ni ti sa nisometry.
Now if the condition in the statement of assertion (iii) is false, then there exist
equalities
αn ◦αn−1 ◦... ◦α2 ◦α1 = ψ ◦φ
where α1,...,α n, ψ are FSMI-morphisms,a n dn is arbitrarily large. Here, we note
that since ψ ◦φ and ψ are FSM-morphisms, it thus follows formally thatφ is also an
FSM-morphism. Next, observe that since φ is an isometry, it follows from the fact

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 43
that ψ is irreducible [cf. also assertion (i); Deﬁnition 1.1, (ii), (b); Remark 1.1.1]
that Div(ψ ◦φ) is either zero or irreducible; since, moreover, deg Fr(ψ ◦φ)a l w a y s
divides a product of two prime numbers [cf. assertion (i); the irreducibility ofφ, ψ],
it thus follows that in any factorization of ψ ◦φ by FSMI-morphisms, all but three
[i.e., corresponding to two possible prime factors of the Frobenius degree, plus one
possible irreducible factor of the zero divisor] of the factorizing FSMI-morphisms
are pull-back morphisms [cf. assertion (i)]. On the other hand, this implies that
factorizations of arbitrarily large length determine chains of FSMI-morphisms [cf.
assertion (i); Proposition 1.11, (vi)] originating from the projection to D of the
domain of φ which are also of arbitrarily large length, a contradiction [cf. condition
(b) of the deﬁnition of a “category of FSMFF-type” in §0]. This completes the
proof of assertion (iii).
Next, we consider assertion (iv). Since deg Fr(β)=d e gFr(β′), it follows from
Remark 1.1.1 that deg Fr(α)=d e g Fr(α′), hence [since α, α′ are irreducible], by
assertion (i), that α is a prime-Frobenius morphism if and only if α′ is. This
completes the proof of assertion (iv).
Finally, we consider assertion (v). First, we observe that the necessity of the
condition in the statement of assertion (v) [where we takeψ to be a prime-Frobenius
morphism such that deg Fr(φ)=d e g Fr(ψ)] follows immediately from Proposition
1.10, (i) [cf. also Deﬁnition 1.3, (ii); assertion (i); the ﬁrst equivalence of categories
of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d)]. Next, we consider suﬃciency. To show that φ is
a prime-Frobenius morphism, it suﬃces [by assertion (i)] to show that it is not a
pull-back morphism. Thus, suppose thatφ is a pull-back morphism. SinceA is non-
group-like, it follows [cf. Proposition 1.4, (iii)] that there exists a step α : A → B,
hence that there exist ψ, β as in the statement of assertion (v). By assertions (i),
(iv), ψ is also a pull-back morphism. Write x
def
=D i v (α), y
def
= α∗(Div(β)) [where,
for simplicity, we write α∗ for Φ(Base(α))]. Then by Remark 1.1.1, it follows that
φ∗(x+y)= x, i.e., that φ∗(x) ≤ x.S i n c ex ̸=0i s arbitrary [cf. the ﬁrst equivalence
of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d)], it thus follows from our assumption that
Φi s non-dilating that φ∗ is the identity morphism. But this implies that x+y = x,
i.e., [since Φ is integral — cf. Deﬁnition 1.1, (i)] that y = 0, in contradiction to
our assumption that β is a step [i.e., not just a [necessarily co-angular!] pre-step
— cf. Proposition 1.4, (i), (iii)]. Thus, we conclude [cf. assertion (iv)] that φ,
ψ are prime-Frobenius morphisms, of the same Frobenius degree. In particular, if
we write x
def
= Div( α), y
def
= α∗(Div(β)), then it follows [cf. Remark 1.1.1] that
φ∗(x + y)=d e gFr(φ) · x, i.e., that φ∗(x) ≼ x [cf. §0], hence [by our assumption
that Φ is non-dilating]t h a tφ∗ is the identity morphism. This completes the proof
of assertion (v). ⃝

44 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Section 2: Frobenius Functors
In the present §2, we discuss various functors between Frobenioids that are
intended to be reminiscent of the Frobenius morphism in positive characteristic
scheme theory.
In the following discussion, we maintain the notation of §1. Also, we assume
that we have been given a divisorial monoid Φ on a connected, totally epimorphic
category D and a Frobenioid C→ FΦ.
Proposition 2.1. (The Naive Frobenius Functor) Let d ∈ N≥1.T h e n :
(i) The assignment
A ↦→ A′; φ ↦→ φ′
—w h e r eφ : A → B is an arbitrary morphism of C; α : A → A′, β : B → B′ are
morphisms of Frobenius typeof Frobenius degreed; φ′ is the unique morphism
such that φ′ ◦α = β ◦φ [cf. Proposition 1.10, (i)] — determines a functor
Ψ: C→C
[well-deﬁned up to isomorphism of functors] which we shall refer to as the naive
Frobenius functor[of degreed]o n C. Finally, the composite of the naive Frobe-
nius functor of degree d1 ∈ N≥1 on C with the naive Frobenius functor of degree
d2 ∈ N≥1 on C is isomorphic to the naive Frobenius functor of degree d1 · d2
on C.
(ii) The functor Ψ of (i) is “ 1-compatible”, relative to C→ FΦ,w i t ht h e
functor FΦ → FΦ — which we shall refer to as the Frobenius functor on FΦ
— determined [cf. Deﬁnition 1.1, (iii)] by the endomorphism of the functor Φ
given by multiplication by d. Moreover, if, in the notation of (i), A = A′, A
is Frobenius-normalized, and the morphism α : A → A′ is taken to be a base-
identity endomorphism, then the morphism of monoids O⊿(A) →O ⊿(A′) induced
by Ψ is given by raising to the d-th power.
(iii) C is of perfect type if and only if Ψ is an equivalence of categories.
Proof. Assertions (i), (ii) follow immediately from Deﬁnition 1.3, (ii); Proposition
1.10, (i) [cf. also Proposition 1.7, (i)]. Finally, we consider assertion (iii). The
suﬃciency of the condition of assertion (iii) follows immediately from the deﬁnition
of “perfect” [cf. Deﬁnition 1.2, (iv); Remark 1.1.1]. To verify necessity, suppose
that C is of perfect type. Then the essential surjectivity of Ψ follows immediately
from the deﬁnition of “perfect” [cf. Deﬁnition 1.2, (iv)]. To verify that Ψ is fully
faithful, we reason as follows: In light of the 1-compatibility of Ψ with the Frobenius
functor on F
Φ [cf. assertion (ii)], the total epimorphicity of C,a n dt h efactorization
of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv), (a), it follows immediately that one may reduce to the case of
linear morphismsby applying theexistence and (essential)uniqueness of morphisms
of Frobenius type of a given Frobenius degree [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (ii)]. Moreover,

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 45
by applying the equivalence of categories [involvingpull-backs] of Deﬁnition 1.3, (i),
(c) [cf. also the isomorphism of functors appearing in the deﬁnition of a “pull-back
morphism” in Deﬁnition 1.2, (ii)], one may reduce further to the case of pre-steps.
But the case of pre-steps follows immediately from the deﬁnition of “perfect” [cf.
Deﬁnition 1.2, (iv)]. This completes the proof of assertion (iii). ⃝
Remark 2.1.1. If C is of perfect type, then for any d = a/b ∈ Q>0,w h e r e
a, b ∈ N≥1, composing the naive Frobenius functor of degree a with some quasi-
inverse functor to the naive Frobenius functor of degreeb yields a “naive Frobenius
functor of degree d”, which, by Proposition 2.1, (i), is independent of the choice of
a, b.
Proposition 2.2. (The Functor O⊿(−)) Write D∗ for the category whose
objects are the objects of Cistr and whose morphisms are given as follows:
HomD∗(A, B)
def
= HomD(AD,B D)
[where A, B ∈ Ob(Cistr); AD
def
= Base( A); BD
def
= Base( B)]. Thus, the natural
projection functor C→D determines natural functors Cistr →D ∗ →D . Moreover:
(i) The functor D∗ →D is an equivalence of categories.
(ii) There is a unique contravariant functor
D∗ → Mon
Ob(Cistr)=O b (D∗) ∋ A ↦→O ⊿(A) ∈ Ob(Mon)
such that forφ : A → B in Arr(Cistr),w i t hi m a g eφD∗ in D∗, the following properties
are satisﬁed: (a) if φ is a [necessarily co-angular – cf. Proposition 1.4, (i)] linear
morphism, then O⊿(φD∗): O⊿(B) →O ⊿(A) is the inclusion of Proposition 1.11,
(iv); (b) if φ is a [necessarily co-angular] pre-step, then O⊿(φD∗): O⊿(B) →
O⊿(A) is the bijection of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (c). By abuse of notation, we shall
also denote by “ O⊿(−)” the restriction of this functor on D∗ to (Cistr)lin. Finally,
by applying the equivalence of categories of (i), we obtain a contravariant functor
D→ Mon, which, by abuse of notation, we shall also denote by “ O⊿(−)”, and
which is well-deﬁned up to isomorphism.
(iii) The assignment Ob(Cistr) ∋ A ↦→O ×(A)( ⊆O ⊿(A)) determines a sub-
functor of the functor of (ii) which is equal to the subfunctor A ↦→O ⊿(A)± [cf.
the notation of §0]. Moreover, the operation “ Div(−)” determines a functorial
homomorphism
O⊿(A) → Φ(A)
that induces an inclusion O⊿(A)char = O⊿(A)/O×(A) ↪→ Φ(A) [cf. the notation
of §0].
(iv) If φ : A → Aistr is an isotropic hull in C,t h e nφ determines a natural
inclusion of monoids O⊿(A) ↪→O ⊿(Aistr).

46 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Proof. As for assertion (i), essential surjectivity follows immediately from Deﬁni-
tion 1.3, (i), (a) [i.e., applied to the Frobenioid Cistr — cf. Proposition 1.9, (v)],
while fully faithfulness follows formally from the deﬁnition of the categoryD∗.N e x t ,
we consider assertion (ii). Let A, B ∈ Ob(Cistr); AD
def
= Base(A); BD
def
= Base(B).
Now observe that any morphism AD → BD in D factors as the composite of an
isomorphism AD
∼
→ CD,w h e r eC ∈ Ob(Cistr), CD
def
= Base( C), with a morphism
CD → BD which is the projection to D of a pull-back morphism C → B of Cistr [cf.
Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (c)]; moreover, this pull-back morphism is uniquely determined,
as an object of Cistr
B , up to isomorphism [cf. the isomorphism of functors appearing
in the deﬁnition of a “pull-back morphism” in Deﬁnition 1.2, (ii)]. Thus, it follows
that to construct the desired functor “ O⊿(−)” on D∗, it suﬃces to construct, for
each isomorphism φD : AD → BD, a bijection O⊿(φD): O⊿(A)
∼
→O ⊿(B)w h i c h
is compatible with composition of isomorphisms. [Indeed, once one constructs
“ O⊿(−)” in this fashion, the fact that this “O⊿(−)” iscompatible with composites
of morphisms of D∗ follows immediately from the manifest functoriality of the in-
clusion of Proposition 1.11, (iv).] This may be done by using co-angular pre-steps
γA : C → A, γB : C → B such that φD = Base(γB) ◦Base(γA)−1 [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3,
(i), (b)] and the bijectionsO⊿(γA): O⊿(A)
∼
→O ⊿(C), O⊿(γB): O⊿(B)
∼
→O ⊿(C)
determined by γA, γB [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (c)]. Note, moreover, that the result-
ing bijection O⊿(γA)−1 ◦O⊿(γB)i s independent of the choice of γA, γB. [Indeed,
if δA : D → A, δB : D → B satisfy φD = Base(δB) ◦Base(δA)−1, then there exist
[cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (b)] co-angular pre-steps ϵC : E → C, ϵD : E → D such that
Base(γA) ◦Base(ϵC) = Base(δA) ◦Base(ϵD)
— which [since Base( δB) ◦Base(δA)−1 = Base(γB) ◦Base(γA)−1] implies that
Base(γB) ◦Base(ϵC) = Base(δB) ◦Base(ϵD)
hence that
O⊿(γA ◦ϵC)= O⊿(δA ◦ϵD); O⊿(γB ◦ϵC)= O⊿(δB ◦ϵD)
[cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (c)], i.e., that
O⊿(ϵC) ◦O⊿(γA)= O⊿(ϵD) ◦O⊿(δA); O⊿(ϵC) ◦O⊿(γB)= O⊿(ϵD) ◦O⊿(δB)
—t h a ti st os a y
O⊿(γA)−1 ◦O⊿(γB)= O⊿(δA)−1 ◦O⊿(δB)
as desired.] This completes the proof of assertion (ii). Assertion (iii) is immediate
from the deﬁnitions [cf. also Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (b); Deﬁnition 1.3, (vi)]. Assertion
(iv) follows immediately from the “universal property of an isotropic hull” [cf.
Deﬁnition 1.2, (iv)] and the fact that an isotropic hull is always a monomorphism
[cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (v), (a)]. ⃝

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 47
Deﬁnition 2.3. We shall refer to as a characteristic splitting on C a subfunctor
in monoids
τ :( Cistr)lin → Mon
of the functor O⊿(−):( Cistr)lin → Mon of Proposition 2.2, (ii), such that the
following properties hold: (a) for every A ∈ Ob(Cistr), τ(A) maps bijectively onto
O⊿(A)char, hence determines a splitting of monoids
O×(A) × τ(A)
∼
→O ⊿(A)
which is functorial in A; (b) for every isotropic hull A → Aistr of C, τ(Aistr) ⊆
O⊿(Aistr) lies in the image of O⊿(A) via the natural injection of Proposition 2.2,
(iv).
Deﬁnition 2.4.
(i) We shall say thatM ∈ Ob(Mon)i s perf-factorial if it satisﬁes the following
conditions:
(a) M is divisorial.
(b) For every p ∈ Prime(M)[ c f .§0], the monoid Mp is monoprime [cf. §0].
(c) The map
Mpf → Mrlf
factor
def
= ∏
p∈Prime(M) Mrlf
p
a ↦→ (..., sup(Boundp
/CB
{0}(a)),... )
[where we writeMrlf
p
def
= Mpf
p ⊗R≥0; we refer to§0 for more on the notation
“ Mpf”, “Mpf
p ”, “⊗R≥0”; the “sup” at the index p is taken in Mrlf
p ]i sa
well-deﬁned [i.e., the various Boundp
/CB
{0}(a) ⊆ Mrlf
p are bounded subsets]
injective homomorphism of monoidswhose image lies in∏
p∈Prime(M) Mpf
p ,
hence determines an injective homomorphism
Mpf ↪→ Mpf
factor
def
=
∏
p∈Prime(M)
Mpf
p
which we shall refer to as the factorization homomorphism of Mpf.W e
shall often use the factorization homomorphism to regard Mpf as a sub-
monoid of Mpf
factor ⊆ Mrlf
factor.
(d) If a ∈ Mrlf
factor, then we shall write Supp(a) ⊆ Prime(M) for the subset of
p for which the component ofa at p is nonzero and refer to Supp(a)a st h e
support of a. Then the submonoid Mpf ⊆ Mpf
factor satisﬁes the following
property: If a ∈ Mpf
factor and b ∈ Mpf satisfy Supp(a) ⊆ Supp(b), then
a ∈ Mpf. [Thus, in particular, if a, b ∈ Mpf, then an inequality “ a ≤ b”
holds in Mpf if and only if it holds in Mpf
factor.]

48 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Now suppose that M is perf-factorial. Then we shall refer to the [subset which is
easily veriﬁed to be a] submonoid
Mrlf ⊆ Mrlf
factor
of elements a ∈ Mrlf
factor such that there exists a b ∈ Mpf satisfying Supp(a) ⊆
Supp(b)a st h erealiﬁcation of M. Thus, both the submonoidMpf ⊆ Mpf
factor and the
submonoid Mrlf ⊆ Mrlf
factor are completely determined by the collection of subsets
Supp(a) ⊆ Prime(M), as a ranges over the elements of Mpf;i f a, b ∈ Mrlf,t h e na n
inequality “a ≤ b”h o l d si nMrlf if and only if it holds in Mrlf
factor;
(Mrlf)gp ⊆ (Mrlf
factor)gp =
∏
p∈Prime(M)
(Mrlf
p )gp
is an R-vector space. Finally, one veriﬁes immediately that Mpf, Mrlf are also
perf-factorial.
(ii) Let Λ be a monoid type. Then we shall say that Λ supports M ∈ Ob(Mon)
if any of the following conditions hold: (a) Λ =Z;( b )Λ= Q,a n dM is perfect;( c )
Λ= R, M is perfect and perf-factorial, and for every p ∈ Prime(M), the monoid
Mp is R-monoprime. Note that if Λ supports M,t h e nΛ>0 acts naturally on M.
(iii) Let Λ be a monoid type that supports Φ [cf. Deﬁnition 1.1, (ii)]; d ∈ Λ>0.
Then we shall write
d · Φ(−) ⊆ Φ(−)
for the subfunctor of Φ determined by the assignment Ob(( Cistr)lin) ∋ A ↦→ d ·
(Φ(A)) (⊆ Φ(A)) and
C(d) ⊆C
for the subcategory determined by the arrows whose zero divisor lies ind · Φ(−) ⊆
Φ(−). Finally, multiplication by d on Φ(−) determines a “Frobenius functor”[as-
sociated to d — cf. Proposition 2.1, (ii)]
FΦ → FΦ
which is compatible with Frobenius degrees and the natural projection functor
FΦ →D .
Proposition 2.5. (The Unit-linear Frobenius Functor) Let τ be a charac-
teristic splitting on C; Λ a monoid type that supports Φ; d ∈ Λ>0.S u p p o s e
that the FrobenioidC is of Frobenius-normalized, metrically trivial,a n dAut-
ample type. Then:
(i) The natural inclusion O⊿(A)char ↪→ Φ(A),w h e r eA ∈ Ob(Cistr),o fP r o p o -
sition 2.2, (iii), is, in fact, a bijection.
(ii) Cistr is of base-trivial type. Moreover, every object ofCistr is Frobenius-
trivial.

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 49
(iii) There exists an equivalence of categories
Ψ: C
∼
→C (d)
— which we shall refer to as the unit-linear Frobenius functor[associated to τ,
d] — that satisﬁes the following properties: (a) Ψ acts as the identity on objects
and isometries of C;( b )Ψ is 1-compatible, relative to the functors
C→ FΦ, C(d) → Fd·Φ =( FΦ)(d) ⊆ FΦ
with the Frobenius functor associated to d on FΦ [which implies, in particular,
that C(d), equipped with the natural functor C(d) → Fd·Φ,i sa Frobenioid].
Proof. First, we observe that, by applying either of the equivalences of categories
of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d), assertion (i) follows formally from the fact that C is of
metrically trivial and Aut-ample type. Next, we consider assertion (ii). Since C
is of metrically trivial type, it follows from the existence of [necessarily co-angular
— cf. Proposition 1.4, (i)] pre-steps relating base-isomorphic objects of Cistr [cf.
Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (b)], that the isomorphism class of an object ofCistr is completely
determined by the isomorphism class of D to which it projects. In particular, it
follows from the existence of Frobenius-trivial objects [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (a)]
that every object of Cistr is Frobenius-trivial. This completes the proof of assertion
(ii).
Finally, we consider assertion (iii). By applying thefactorizations of Deﬁnition
1.3, (iv), (a); (v), (c), together with the bijection of assertion (i) [cf. also the equiv-
alences of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d)], we conclude that every morphism
φ of C admits a factorization
φ = α ◦β ◦γ ◦δ
in C,w h e r eα is a pull-back morphism; β is a base-identity pre-step endomorphism
[hence is co-angular, by Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (b)]; γ is an isometric pre-step; δ is a
morphism of Frobenius type. Moreover, this factorization is unique [cf. Deﬁnition
1.3, (iv), (a); (v), (c)], up to replacing (α, β, γ, δ)b y(α◦ϵ, ϵ
−1◦β◦ζ,ζ−1◦γ◦θ,θ−1◦δ),
where ϵ, θare isomorphisms ofC,a n dζ= β′◦ϵ,f o rs o m ebase-identity automorphism
β′. Suppose that β ∈O ⊿(A), for A ∈ Ob(C). Thus, by applying the characteristic
splitting
O×(A) × τ(A)
∼
→O ⊿(A)
[which applies even ifA is not isotropic— cf. Deﬁnition 2.3, (a), (b)] to β ∈O ⊿(A),
we obtain a factorization
β = β0 · β1
[where β0 ∈O ×(A), β1 ∈ τ(A)]. Now we set
Ψ(β)
def
= β0 · βd
1 ;Ψ ( φ)
def
= α ◦Ψ(β) ◦γ ◦δ

50 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
[where we note that the expression “ βd
1 ” makes sense for d ∈ Λ>0, by assertion
(i); Deﬁnition 2.4, (ii)]. Then it follows immediately from the functoriality of the
characteristic splitting τ(−) that for any isomorphismϵ : A′ ∼
→ A in C, β′ ∈O ×(A),
we have Ψ(ϵ−1 ◦β◦β′ ◦ϵ)= ϵ−1 ◦Ψ(β) ◦β′ ◦ϵ. This implies immediately that Ψ(φ)
is independent of the choice of factorization φ = α ◦β ◦γ ◦δ.
Next, observe that by assertion (ii), it follows that if φ ∈ Arr(Cistr), then the
morphism of Frobenius type δ may be taken to be a base-identity endomorphism.
Thus, by the functoriality of τ with respect to morphisms of ( Cistr)lin, and our
assumption that C is of Frobenius-normalizedtype — together with the elementary
computation
Ψ(βd′
)=Ψ ( βd′
0 · βd′
1 )= βd′
0 · (βd′
1 )d =( β0 · βd
1 )d′
=Ψ (β)d′
for d′ ∈ N≥1 — it follows that the assignment φ ↦→ Ψ(φ)i s compatible with com-
posites, at least when φ ∈ Arr(Cistr). On the other hand, since isotropic hulls are
monomorphisms [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (v), (a)], this implies [by relating an arbitrary
φ ∈ Arr(C) to the result of applying the isotropiﬁcation functor of Proposition 1.9,
(v), to φ] that the assignmentφ ↦→ Ψ(φ)i s compatible with composites, for arbitrary
φ ∈ Arr(C). This completes the deﬁnition of a functor Ψ : C→C (d) which satisﬁes
the properties (a), (b) in the statement of Proposition 2.5, (iii). On the other hand,
it is clear from the deﬁnition of Ψ, C(d) that Ψ is essentially surjective, faithful,a n d
full [cf. assertion (i)]. This completes the proof of Proposition 2.5. ⃝
Remark 2.5.1. If C is of isotropic and unit-trivial type, then the “unit-linear
Frobenius functor” of Proposition 2.5, (iii), may be regarded as a sort of gener-
alization of the “naive Frobenius functor” of Proposition 2.1, (i), to the case of
d ̸∈ N≥1.
Corollary 2.6. (Unit-wise Frobenius Functors I) Let τ be a character-
istic splitting on C; d ∈ N≥1. Suppose that the Frobenioid C is of Frobenius-
normalized, metrically trivial,a n dAut-ample type. Then there exists afunc-
tor
Ψ: C→C
— which we shall refer to as the unit-wise Frobenius functor [associated to τ,
d] — which satisﬁes the following properties:
(a) Ψ is 1-compatible, relative to the functor C→ FΦ,w i t ht h eidentity
functor on FΦ.
(b) Ψ maps an object (respectively, morphism of Frobenius type; pre-step; pull-
back morphism) ofCistr to an isomorphic object (respectively,abstractly equiva-
lent morphism; abstractly equivalent morphism; abstractly equivalent mor-
phism) of C.
(c) If A ∈ Ob(Cistr), then there exists an isomorphismΨ(A) ∼= A such that the
endomorphism of O×(A) induced byΨ followed by conjugation by this isomorphism
is given by raising to the d-th power.

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 51
(d) If C is of perfect type ,t h e nΨ is an equivalence of categories.I f
d =1 or C is of isotropic and unit-trivial type, then Ψ is isomorphic to the
identity functor.
Proof. First, let us observe that the naive Frobenius functor C→C associated
to d [cf. Proposition 2.1, (i)] factors naturally through the subcategory C(d) ⊆
C [cf. Proposition 2.1, (ii); Deﬁnition 2.4, (iii)]; write Ψ 1 : C→C (d) for the
resulting functor. Next, let us write Ψ2 : C(d) →C for some quasi-inverse functor to
the unit-linear Frobenius functor[which is an equivalence of categories] associated
to d [cf. Proposition 2.5, (iii)]. Set Ψ
def
=Ψ 2 ◦Ψ1 : C→C . Then it follows
immediately from Propositions 2.1, (ii); 2.5, (iii), (b), that Ψ satisﬁes property
(a). Since [cf. Proposition 2.5, (ii)] the isomorphism class of an object of Cistr is
completely determined by the isomorphism class of D to which it projects, it thus
follows that Ψ preserves isomorphism classes of objects ofCistr. Now the remainder
of properties (b), (c), (d) follows immediately from the construction of Ψ 1,Ψ 2 in
the proofs of Propositions 2.1, (i); 2.5, (iii) [cf. also Remark 2.5.1; Proposition 1.10,
(i); Deﬁnition 1.3, (ii); equivalences of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d); the
deﬁnition of a “pull-back morphism” in Deﬁnition 1.2, (ii); Proposition 2.1, (iii)].
⃝
Deﬁnition 2.7. Suppose that the Frobenioid C is of isotropic type.
(i) We shall refer to as a base-section of the Frobenioid C any subcategory
P⊆C
pl-bk ⊆C [where Cpl-bk ⊆C is as in Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (c)] satisfying the
following conditions: (a) P is a skeleton [cf. §0]; (b) every object of P is Frobenius-
trivial; (c) the composite P→D of the inclusion functor P ↪→C with the natural
projection functor C→D is an equivalence of categories. In this situation, we shall
refer to the morphisms of C that lie in P as P-distinguished.
(ii) Let P⊆C be a base-section. Observe that since D, hence also P,i sa
connected category, it follows immediately that for any ϵ ∈ End(P ↪→C ), it makes
sense to speak of the Frobenius degreedegFr(ϵ) ∈ N≥1 of ϵ — i.e., the Frobenius
degree of the endomorphisms in C [of objects of P] determined by ϵ [which, since
P is connected, is easily seen to be independent of the choice of object of P —c f .
Remark 1.1.1]. We shall refer to as a[P-]Frobenius-sectionof the Frobenioid C any
homomorphism of monoids
F : N≥1 → End(P ↪→C )
satisfying the following conditions: (a) the composite ofF with the homomorphism
End(P ↪→C ) → N≥1 determined by considering the Frobenius degreeis the iden-
tity on N≥1; (b) the endomorphisms of objects of C determined by an element of
End(P ↪→C ) in the image of F are base-identity endomorphisms of Frobenius type.
We shall refer to a Frobenius-sectionF which is regarded as being known only up to
composition with automorphisms of the monoid N≥1 as a quasi-Frobenius-section.
If F is a Frobenius-section, then we shall refer to the endomorphisms of C induced
by elements of End(P ↪→C ) in the image of F as F-distinguished.

52 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(iii) We shall refer to a pair ( P, F), where P is a base-section of C,a n dF is
a P-Frobenius-section of C,a sa base-Frobenius pair of C;w h e nF is regarded as
being known only up to composition with automorphisms of the monoid N≥1,w e
shall refer to such a pair as aquasi-base-Frobenius pair. If the Frobenioid C admits
a base-Frobenius pair [or, equivalently, a quasi-base-Frobenius pair], then we shall
say that C is of pre-model type.
Remark 2.7.1. The notions of a “base-section” and “Frobenius-section” are
intended to be a sort of “category-theoretic translation”of the notion of a “choice
of trivialization of a trivial line bundle”, which occurs naturally whenC is a category
of trivial line bundles [cf. Remark 5.6.1; Examples 6.1, 6.3 below].
Remark 2.7.2. Suppose that C is ofisotropic type. Let (P, F)b ea base-Frobenius
pair of C. Then the only arrows of C which are both F-a n dP-distinguished [hence
base-identity automorphisms — cf., e.g., the factorization of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv),
(a)] are the identity arrows. Suppose further that the Frobenioid C is of base-trivial
type, and that the category C is a skeleton. Then every morphism φ of C admits a
factorization
φ = α ◦β ◦γ
where α is P-distinguished; β is a base-identity pre-step endomorphism; γ is F-
distinguished. Moreover, this factorization is unique [in the strict sense — i.e., not
up to isomorphisms, etc.]. [Indeed, the existence and uniqueness of thefactorization
in question follow immediately from Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv), (a); the deﬁnition of P-,
F-distinguished; our assumptions concerning C;t h e total epimorphicity of C;t h e
isomorphism of functors appearing in the deﬁnition of a “pull-back morphism” in
Deﬁnition 1.2, (ii).]
Deﬁnition 2.8.
(i) If, for everyA ∈ Ob(C), it holds thatO×(A) admits a [uniquely determined]
proﬁnite topology such that O×(A), equipped with this topology, is a topologically
ﬁnitely generated proﬁnite [abelian] group, then we shall say that C is of unit-
proﬁnite type.
(ii) Suppose thatM is a topologically ﬁnitely generated proﬁnite abelian group.
Thus, M decomposes as a direct product of pro-l groups M[l], where l varies over
the elements ofPrimes [cf. §0]. We shall refer to the factorM[l]a st h epro-l portion
of M.
(iii) Let M be as in (ii); assume that the group law ofM is written multiplica-
tively.I f ζ: Primes → N≥1 is a set-theoretic function, then we shall refer to as the
map given by raising to the ζ-th power on M the map M → M
(M ∋) a ↦→ aζ (∈ M)
given by raising to the ζ(l)-th power on M[l], for l ∈ Primes. We shall refer to a
set-theoretic function ζ : Primes → N≥1 as being of co-prime type if ζ maps each

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 53
element l ∈ Primes to an element ofN≥1 that is prime tol.[ T h u s ,i fζis of co-prime
type, then the map given by raising to the ζ-th power will always be bijective.]
Proposition 2.9. (Unit-wise Frobenius Functors II) Suppose that the
Frobenioid C is of Frobenius-normalized, base-trivial, isotropic,a n d Aut-
ample [cf. Remark 2.9.2 below] type. Then:
(i) If the base category D admits a terminal object [cf. §0], then C is of
pre-model type.
(ii) Letτbe acharacteristic splittingon C; ζ: Primes → N≥1 a set-theoretic
function. Suppose that C is of pre-model and unit-proﬁnite type. Then there
exists a functor
Ψ: C→C
— which we shall refer to as the unit-wise Frobenius functor [associated to τ,
ζ] — which satisﬁes the following properties:
(a) Ψ is 1-compatible, relative to the functor C→ FΦ,w i t ht h eidentity
functor on FΦ.
(b) Ψ maps an object (respectively, morphism of Frobenius type; pre-step;
pull-back morphism) ofC to anisomorphic object (respectively,abstractly
equivalent morphism; abstractly equivalent morphism; abstractly
equivalent morphism) of C.
(c) If A ∈ Ob(C), then there exists an isomorphism Ψ(A) ∼= A such that
the endomorphism of O×(A) induced by Ψ followed by conjugation by this
isomorphism is given by raising to the ζ-th power.
(d) If ζis of co-prime type [cf. Deﬁnition 2.8, (iii)], then Ψ is an equiv-
alence of categories.I f C is of unit-trivial type,t h e nΨ is isomorphic
to the identity functor.
Proof. By well-known general nonsense in category theory, we may assume, with-
out loss of generality, for the remainder of the proof of Proposition 2.9, that the
category C is a skeleton.T h u s ,Cpl-bk is also a skeleton. Now we consider assertion
(i). Observe [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (c); the fact that C is of base-trivial type] that
if A ∈ Ob(C) projects to a terminal object of D,t h e nA is pseudo-terminal [cf. §0].
Note that by Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (a), and our assumptions onD, it follows that such
an object A always exists; let usﬁx one such object A. Thus, the natural projection
functor determines an equivalence of categories
Cpl-bk
A
∼
→D
[cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (c)]. Note that it follows immediately from the existence
of this equivalence of categories [together with the fact that A maps to a terminal

54 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
object of D] that the natural functor Cpl-bk
A →C pl-bk is injective on isomorphism
classes of objects. In particular, if Q⊆C pl-bk
A is a skeletal subcategory[cf. §0], then
[relative to some suﬃciently large universe with respect to which, say, the category
C is small] the natural map
Ob(Q) → Ob(Cpl-bk)=O b (C)
is bijective [cf. the fact that C is of base-trivial type; the equivalence Cpl-bk
A
∼
→D ].
Thus, the subcategory P⊆C determined by the image of the objects and arrows
of Q in C is a skeleton which satisﬁes the conditions of Deﬁnition 2.7, (i) [cf. the
fact that C is of base-trivial and isotropic type; Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (a)] — that is to
say, P is a base-section.
Next, let us observe [cf. the fact thatC is ofbase-trivial and isotropic type; Def-
inition 1.3, (i), (a)] that A is Frobenius-trivial, hence that there exists a morphism
of monoids
FA : N≥1 → EndC(A)
whose composite with the morphism of monoids degFr(−) : EndC(A) → N≥1 is the
identity morphism on N≥1, and whose image consists of base-identity endomor-
phisms of Frobenius type of A. Thus, by Proposition 1.11, (iii), we conclude that
FA extends to a P-Frobenius-section
F : N≥1 → End(P→C )
— hence that C is of pre-model type, as desired. This completes the proof of assertion
(i).
Next, we consider assertion (ii). Observe [cf. the fact that C is of base-trivial
and isotropic type; the fact that C is a skeleton] we may apply Remark 2.7.2 to
conclude that every morphism φ : C → D of C admits a unique factorization
φ = α ◦β ◦γ
in C,w h e r eα is P-distinguished; β is a base-identity pre-step endomorphism; γ
is F-distinguished. Now [cf. the proof of Proposition 2.5, (iii)] by applying the
characteristic splitting [cf. Deﬁnition 2.3, (a)] O×(C) × τ(C)
∼
→O ⊿(C), we may
write
β = β0 · β1 ∈O ⊿(C)
[where β0 ∈O ×(C), β1 ∈ τ(C)]. Set
Ψ(β)
def
= βζ
0 · β1;Ψ ( φ)
def
= α ◦Ψ(β) ◦γ
[where “( −)ζ” is as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 2.8, (iii)]. Since β is completely determined
by φ, it follows that Ψ is well-deﬁned [as a “map on arrows”]. Moreover, it follows
from the deﬁnition of P-a n d F-distinguished morphisms [together with the fact
that raising to the ζ-th power deﬁnes an endomorphism of the functor in monoids
“ O×(−)” onClin which commutes with raising to thed-th power, ford ∈ N≥1 —c f .

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 55
our assumption that C is of Frobenius-normalizedtype] that Ψ is, in fact, afunctor,
and that Ψ satisﬁes properties (a), (b), (c), (d) in the statement of Proposition 2.9,
(ii). This completes the proof of Proposition 2.9. ⃝
Remark 2.9.1. By “base-changing”the FrobenioidC via various functorsD′ →D
as in Proposition 1.6, it follows that one may obtain“unit-wise Frobenius functors”
as in Proposition 2.9, (ii), for many Frobenioids whose base categories do not nec-
essarily admit terminal objects [as is required in the hypotheses of Proposition 2.9,
(i)].
Remark 2.9.2. We shall see later [cf. Theorem 5.1, (iii)] that in fact, the
Aut-ampleness hypothesis in the statement of Proposition 2.9 is superﬂuous .

56 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Section 3: Category-theoreticity of the Base and Frobenius Degree
In the present §3, we show various results in the “opposite direction” to the
direction represented by the variousFrobenius functorsof §2. Namely, we show that
various natural structures — such as Frobenius degreesand the natural projection
functor to the base category—a r e preserved by equivalences of categories between
Frobenioids.
In the following discussion, we maintain the notation of§1, §2. Also, we assume
that we have been given a divisorial monoid Φ on a connected, totally epimorphic
category D and a Frobenioid C→ FΦ.
Deﬁnition 3.1.
(i) We shall say that C is of quasi-isotropic type if it holds that A ∈ Ob(C)
is non-isotropic if and only if it is an iso-subanchor [cf. §0]. [Thus, if C is of
isotropic type, then C is of quasi-isotropic type — cf. Remark 3.1.1 below.] We
shall say that C is of standard type if the following conditions are satisﬁed: (a)
C is of quasi-isotropic and Frobenius-isotropic type; (b) if C is of group-like type,
then Cistr admits a Frobenius-compactobject; (c) C is of Frobenius-normalized type;
(d) D is of FSMFF-type;( e )Φi s non-dilating. We shall say that a category E is
Frobenius-slimif every homomorphism of monoids
F → Aut(EA →E )
[where A ∈ Ob(E)] factors through the natural surjection F ↠ N≥1.[ T h u s , e v e r y
slim category is Frobenius-slim.]
(ii) Write CFr-tp ⊆C for the subcategory of C determined by the morphisms of
Frobenius type; Cbi-Fr ⊆C Fr-tp ×C Fr-tp for the subcategory of the product category
CFr-tp ×C Fr-tp determined by pairs of morphisms of Frobenius type of the same
Frobenius degree. For A, B ∈ Ob(C), we shall write
Hompf
C (A, B)
def
= lim −→
(A→ A′,B→ B′)∈Ob((A,B)Cbi-F r)
HomC(A′,B ′)
where the inductive limit is parametrized by [say, some small skeletal subcategory
of] (A,B)Cbi-Fr;t h em a p
HomC(A′,B ′) → HomC(A′′,B ′′)
induced by a morphism (A′ → A′′,B ′ → B′′)i n (A,B)Cbi-Fr from an object ( A →
A′,B → B′)o f (A,B)Cbi-Fr to an object (A → A′′,B → B′′)o f (A,B)Cbi-Fr is the map
determined by the assignment “φ ↦→ φ′” of Proposition 1.10, (i). We shall refer to
an element of Hompf
C (A, B)a sa perfected morphism A → B.
(iii) Suppose that the Frobenioid C is of Frobenius-isotropic type. Then we
shall write
Cpf

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 57
for the category — which we shall refer to as the perfection of C — deﬁned as
follows: The objects of Cpf are pairs ( A, n), where A ∈ Ob(C), n ∈ N≥1.T h e
morphisms of Cpf are given by
HomCpf ((A, n), (B,m ))
def
= Hompf
C (A′,B ′)
where (A, n)a n d(B,m ) are objects of Cpf; A → A′ is a morphism of Frobenius
type in C of Frobenius degree m; B → B′ is a morphism of Frobenius type in C of
Frobenius degree n; one veriﬁes immediately [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (ii)] that this set of
morphisms of Cpf from (A, n)t o( B,m )i s independent [up to uniquely determined
natural bijections] of the choice of morphisms of Frobenius type A → A′, B → B′;
composition of morphisms of Cpf is deﬁned in the evident fashion. [Thus, in words,
the pair (A, n) is to be thought of as an“n-th root ofA”.] Also, we obtain a natural
functor C→C pf [by mapping “A ↦→ (A, 1)”].
(iv) Two co-objective [cf. §0] morphisms α1,α2 : A → B of Cistr will be called
unit-equivalent if there exist morphisms γ : A → C, β : C → B [in Cistr]a n da n
automorphism δ ∈O ×(C) such that α1 = β ◦γ, α2 = β ◦δ◦γ. In this situation,
we shall write α1
O×
≈ α2.[ T h u s , i fC is of unit-trivial type, then two co-objective
morphisms of Cistr are unit-equivalent if and only if they areequal.] By Proposition
3.3, (ii), below, it follows that “
O×
≈ ” determines an equivalence relation on the set
of morphisms A → B in Cistr which is, moreover, closed under composition of
morphisms; we shall write
Homun-tr
Cistr (A, B)
for the set of unit-equivalence classes of morphisms A → B. Also, we shall write
Cun-tr
for the category whose objects are the objects of Cistr, and whose morphisms are
given by “Homun-tr
Cistr (−, −)”, and refer to Cun-tr as the unit-trivialization of C.
Remark 3.1.1. Observe that:
An iso-subanchor of the Frobenioid C is never isotropic. [In particular, if
C is of isotropic type, then C is of quasi-isotropic type.]
Indeed, by Proposition 1.10, (iv), an anchor is never isotropic. Thus, by Deﬁnition
1.3, (vii), (b), a subanchor is never isotropic. Now if B → A is a mono-minimal
categorical quotient [cf. §0] in C of B by a group G ⊆ AutC(B) such that B
is a subanchor and A is isotropic, then applying the isotropiﬁcation functor of
Proposition 1.9, (v), yields a factorization B → B′ → A,w h e r eB → B′ is an
isotropic hull [hence a monomorphism — cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (v), (a)], such that G
acts compatibly [relative to the arrowB → B′]o n B′; thus, by the deﬁnition of the
term “mono-minimal” it follows that the arrowB → B′ is anisomorphism, i.e., that
B is isotropic — a contradiction. This completes the proof of the “observation”.

58 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Remark 3.1.2. Observe that for any residually ﬁnite group G [i.e., a group G
such that the intersection of the normal subgroups of ﬁnite index of G is trivial]:
Any homomorphism of monoids F → G factors through the natural sur-
jection F ↠ N≥1.
[Indeed, it suﬃces to show this when G is ﬁnite .W h e n G is ﬁnite, it follows
immediately from the deﬁnition of F [cf. Deﬁnition 1.1, (iii)] that the image of
1 ∈ Z≥0 in G is an element γ ∈ G such that for every d ∈ N≥1, there exists an
element δd ∈ G such that δd ·γ·δ−1
d = γd. Thus, by taking d to be the order ofγ,w e
conclude that γ is the identity, hence that the homomorphism of monoids F → G
factors through the natural surjectionF ↠ N≥1, as desired.] In particular, it follows
that if E is a category such that for every A ∈ Ob(E), the group Aut( EA →E )i s
residually ﬁnite ,t h e nE is Frobenius-slim.
Remark 3.1.3. The phenomenon discussed in Remark 3.1.2 may be regarded as
an example of the following fundamental dichotomy [which is, in a certain sense, a
central theme of the theory of the present paper] between the structure of the base
category D and the “Frobenius structure”constituted by N≥1:
base category
 Frobenius
“indiﬀerent to order”
 “order-conscious”
groups
 non-group-like monoids
This sort of phenomenon may be observed in “classical scheme theory” for instance
in the invariance of the ´etale site of a scheme in positive characteristic under the
Frobenius morphism. Here, it is useful to recall that a typical example of a “base
category” is constituted by the subcategory of connected objects of aGalois category
[which is easily veriﬁed to be of FSM-, hence also of FSMFF-type]. By contrast,
categories such as Order(Z≥0), Order(N≥1) or [the one-object categories determined
by] Z≥0, N≥1 are not of FSMFF-type. In this context, it is interesting to note that
categories such as Order( −)o fa ﬁnite subset of Z≥0 of cardinality ≥ 2 [with the
induced ordering] constitute a sort of “borderline case”,w h i c hi so fFSMFF-, but
not of FSM-,t y p e .
Proposition 3.2. (Perfections of Frobenioids) Suppose that the Frobenioid
C is of Frobenius-isotropic type. Then:
(i) There is a natural 1-commutative diagram of functors
C− → C pf
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
F
Φ −→ FΦpf
— where the vertical arrow on the left is the functor that deﬁnes the Frobenioid
structure on C; the vertical arrow on the right is induced by the vertical arrow on

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 59
the left; the lower horizontal arrow is induced by the natural morphism of monoids
Φ → Φpf; the upper horizontal arrow is the natural functor C→C pf of Deﬁnition
3.1, (iii). In particular, the functor Cpf → FΦpf determines a pre-Frobenioid
structure on Cpf.
(ii) An arrow of Cpf is a(n) morphism of Frobenius type (respectively,
pre-step; base-isomorphism; base-identity endomorphism; isomorphism;
pull-back morphism; isometry; co-angular morphism; LB-invertible mor-
phism; morphism of a givenFrobenius degree) if and only if a coﬁnal collection
of the system of arrows of C that determine this arrow of Cpf [cf. Deﬁnition 3.1,
(ii)] is so.
(iii) The category Cpf, equipped with the functor Cpf → FΦpf of the diagram of
(i), is a Frobenioid of perfect and isotropic type. Moreover, there is a natural
equivalence of categories Cpf ∼
→ (Cpf)pf.
Proof. In light of our assumption that the Frobenioid C is of Frobenius-isotropic
type, assertions (i), (ii), (iii) follow immediately from the deﬁnitions; Proposition
1.10, (i) [cf. also Proposition 2.1, (iii)]. ⃝
Proposition 3.3. (Base-identity Pre-steps and Units)
(i) Write
End(Cpl-bk
A →C )bs-iso ⊆ End(Cpl-bk
A →C )
[where Cpl-bk is as in Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (c); Cpl-bk
A →C is the natural functor]
for the submonoid consisting of those natural transformations such that the various
endomorphisms of objects ofC that occur in the natural transformation are allbase-
isomorphisms.T h e n i fD is Frobenius-slim, then the image of 1 ∈ Z≥0 ⊆ F
under any homomorphism of monoids
F → End(Cpl-bk
A →C )bs-iso
determines an element of End(Cpl-bk
A →C )bs-iso with the property that the various
endomorphisms of objects of C that occur in the natural transformation determined
by this element are allbase-identity pre-steps[i.e., lie in “O⊿(−)”]. Conversely,
if C is of Frobenius-normalized type, and A is Frobenius-trivial, then every
base-identity pre-step endomorphism ofA arises as the endomorphism ofA induced
by the image of 1 ∈ Z≥0 ⊆ F via a homomorphism of monoids F → End(Cpl-bk
A →
C)bs-iso.
(ii) Two co-objective morphismsα1,α2 : A → B of Cistr are unit-equivalentif
and only if they map to thesame morphism ofFΦ, i.e., if and only if the following
three conditions are satisﬁed: (a) degFr(α1)=d e gFr(α2);( b )Div(α1)=D i v (α2);
(c) Base(α1) = Base(α2).
(iii) There is a natural functor
Cistr →C un-tr

60 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
which isfull and essentially surjective; moreover, this functor is anequivalence
of categories if and only if Cistr is of unit-trivial type.
(iv) The functor Cistr → FΦ factors naturally through Cun-tr, hence determines
a functor
Cun-tr → FΦ
which is faithful and essentially surjective; moreover, this functor determines
a natural structure of Frobenioid on Cun-tr, with respect to which Cun-tr is of
isotropic and unit-trivial type. Finally, an arrow of Cun-tr is a(n) morphism
of Frobenius type (respectively,pre-step; base-isomorphism; isomorphism;
pull-back morphism; isometry; co-angular morphism; LB-invertible mor-
phism; morphism of a givenFrobenius degree) if and only if it arises from such
an arrow of Cistr.
(v) The functor
C→ FΦ
is an equivalence of categories if and only if the FrobenioidC is of Aut-ample,
unit-trivial,a n dbase-trivial type.
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). Note that since the composite of the functor
Cpl-bk
A →C with the natural projection functor C→D factors as the composite of
the equivalence of categories [involving pull-back morphisms] of Deﬁnition 1.3, (i),
(c), Cpl-bk
A
∼
→D AD [where AD
def
= Base(A)] with the natural functor DAD →D ,i t
follows that any homomorphism of monoids F → End(Cpl-bk
A →C )bs-iso determines
a homomorphism of monoids
F → Aut(DAD →D )
—w h i c h ,i fD is Frobenius-slim[cf. Deﬁnition 3.1, (i)], necessarily factors through
the natural surjection F ↠ N≥1 — together with a homomorphism of monoids
F → N≥1
obtained by considering theFrobenius degreeof the induced endomorphism ofA —
which [in light of the fact that the monoid N≥1 is commutative, together with the
structure of F — cf. Deﬁnition 1.1, (iii)] also necessarily factors through the natural
surjection F ↠ N≥1. Thus, we conclude that if D is Frobenius-slim, then the image
of 1 ∈ Z≥0 ⊆ F under the given homomorphism of monoids F → End(Cpl-bk
A →
C)bs-iso determines an element of End(Cpl-bk
A →C )bs-iso with the property that the
various endomorphisms of objects of C that occur in the natural transformation
determined by this element are all base-identity pre-steps, as desired.
The “converse assertion” [when C is of Frobenius-normalized type, and A is
Frobenius-trivial] may be veriﬁed by choosing a homomorphism of monoids
N≥1 → EndC(A)

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 61
as in the deﬁnition of the term “Frobenius-trivial” [cf. the homomorphism “ ζ”o f
Deﬁnition 1.2, (iv)], which, together with the homomorphism of monoids
Z≥0 → EndC(A)
that maps 1 ∈ Z≥0 to a given base-identity pre-step endomorphism of A, yields
[cf. our assumption that C is of Frobenius-normalizedtype!] a homomorphism of
monoids
F → EndC(A)
— which, by applying Proposition 1.11, (iii), lifts to a homomorphism of monoids
F → End(Cpl-bk
A →C )bs-iso, as desired. This completes the proof of assertion (i).
Next, we consider assertion (ii). Since assertion (ii) clearly only concerns the
Frobenioid Cistr [cf. Proposition 1.9, (v)], we may replace C by Cistr and assume
for the remainder of the proof of assertion (ii) that C is of isotropic type.N o wt h e
necessity of the three conditions (a), (b), (c) follows immediately [cf. Remark 1.1.1]
from the fact that endomorphisms of “ O×”a r eLB-invertible base-identity linear
endomorphisms. To show the suﬃciency of these three conditions, we apply the
factorization of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv), (a) [cf. also Proposition 1.4, (i)], the essential
uniqueness of morphisms of Frobenius type of a given Frobenius degree [cf. Deﬁ-
nition 1.3, (ii)], and the equivalence of categories [involving pull-back morphisms]
of Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (c), to α1, α2. Then conditions (a), (c) imply that there
exist morphisms γ : A → C; β1,β2 : C → D; δ : D → B,w h e r eγ is a mor-
phism of Frobenius type, β1 and β2 are base-equivalent co-angular pre-steps, and
δ: D → B is a pull-back morphism such thatα1 = δ◦β1 ◦γ, α2 = δ◦β2 ◦γ.S i n c e
δ, γ are LB-invertible, it thus follows from condition (b) [cf. also Remark 1.1.1]
that Div(β1) = Div(β2), hence [by Deﬁnition 1.3, (vi)] that β2 = ζ◦β1,f o rs o m e
ζ ∈O ×(D). Since α1 = δ◦(β1 ◦γ), α2 = δ◦ζ ◦(β1 ◦γ), we thus conclude that
α1
O×
≈ α2, as desired. This completes the proof of assertion (ii). Now assertion (iii)
is immediate from the deﬁnitions.
In light of assertions (ii), (iii), assertion (iv) is immediate from the deﬁnitions.
As for assertion (v), the necessity of the condition in the statement of assertion (v)
follows immediately from Proposition 1.5, (i), (ii). To verify the suﬃciency of this
condition, let us ﬁrst observe that if C is of unit-trivial and base-trivial type, then
[by the existence of isotropic hulls inC — cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (vii), (a)] it follows that
C is also of isotropic type, hence that we have a natural equivalence of categories
C
∼
→C un-tr [cf. assertion (iii)]. Thus, by assertion (iv), it follows that the natural
functor C→ FΦ is faithful and essentially surjective.S i n c eC is of base-trivial and
Aut-ample type, it follows from thefactorization of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv), (a) [cf. also
the existence and uniqueness of morphisms of Frobenius type of a given Frobenius
degree asserted in Deﬁnition 1.3, (ii); the equivalence of categories involving pull-
back morphisms of Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (c)], that to show that C→ FΦ is full,i t
suﬃces to show that it is surjective on base-identity pre-step endomorphisms [i.e.,
on “ O⊿(−)”]; but, by our assumption thatC is of base-trivial and Aut-ample type,
this follows immediately from the ﬁrst equivalence of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3,
(iii), (d). This completes the proof of assertion (v). ⃝

62 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Theorem 3.4. (Category-theoreticity of the Base and Frobenius De-
gree) For i =1 , 2,l e tΦi be a divisorial monoid on a connected, totally epimor-
phic category Di; Ci → FΦi a Frobenioid;
Ψ: C1
∼
→C 2
an equivalence of categories.T h e n :
(i) Suppose that C1, C2 are of quasi-isotropic type.T h e nΨ preserves the
isotropic objects, isotropic hulls,a n disometric pre-steps. Moreover, there
exists a 1-unique functor Ψistr : Cistr
1 →C istr
2 that ﬁts into a 1-commutative diagram
C1
Ψ
−→ C 2
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
Cistr
1
Ψ istr
−→ C istr
2
[where the vertical arrows are the natural “isotropiﬁcation functors” of Proposition
1.9, (v); the horizontal arrows are equivalences of categories]. Finally, ifD1, D2 are
slim,a n dC1, C2 are of Frobenius-normalized type, then each of the composite
functors of this diagram is rigid.
(ii) Suppose that C1, C2 are of quasi-isotropic type, and that D1, D2 are of
FSMFF-type.T h e nΨ preserves pre-steps, co-angular pre-steps,a n dgroup-
like objects.
(iii) Suppose that: (a)C1, C2 are of standard type;( b )i fC1, C2 are of group-
like type, then both Ψ and some quasi-inverse to Ψ preserve base-isomorphisms.
Then Ψ preserves morphisms of Frobenius type, linear morphisms, base-
isomorphisms, co-angular morphisms, pull-back morphisms, isometries,
and LB-invertible morphisms. Moreover, there exists an automorphism of monoids
Ψ N≥ 1 : N≥1
∼
→ N≥1
such that Ψ maps morphisms of Frobenius degree d to morphisms of Frobenius
degreeΨ N≥ 1 (d);i f C1, C2 admit a non-group-like object, then Ψ N
≥1 is the identity
automorphism. Also, there exists a 1-unique functor Ψpf : Cpf
1 →C pf
2 that ﬁts into
a 1-commutative diagram
C1
Ψ
−→ C 2
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
C
pf
1
Ψ pf
−→ C pf
2
[where the vertical arrows are the natural functors of Proposition 3.2, (i); the hori-
zontal arrows are equivalences of categories]. Finally, ifD1, D2 are slim, then each
of the composite functors of this diagram is rigid.
(iv) Suppose that: (a)C1, C2 are of standard type;( b )i fC1, C2 are of group-
like type, then both Ψ and some quasi-inverse to Ψ preserve base-isomorphisms;

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 63
(c) D1, D2 are Frobenius-slim.T h e nΨ preserves the submonoids “ O⊿(−)”,
“ O×(−)”;Ψ N≥ 1 is the identity automorphism. Moreover, there exists a1-unique
functor Ψun-tr : Cun-tr
1 →C un-tr
2 that ﬁts into a 1-commutative diagram
Cistr
1
Ψ istr
−→ C istr
2
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
Cun-tr
1
Ψ un-tr
−→ C un-tr
2
[where the vertical arrows are the natural functors of Proposition 3.3, (iii); the
horizontal arrows are equivalences of categories]. Finally, ifD1, D2 are slim,t h e n
each of the composite functors of this diagram isrigid.
(v) Suppose that: (a) C1, C2 are of standard type;( b )i fC1, C2 are of group-
like type, then both Ψ and some quasi-inverse to Ψ preserve base-isomorphisms;
(c) D1, D2 are slim.T h e nΨ preserves the base-identity endomorphisms and
base-equivalent pairs of co-objective morphisms. Moreover, there exists a 1-
unique functor ΨBase : D1 →D 2 that ﬁts into a 1-commutative diagram
C1
Ψ
−→ C 2
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
D1
Ψ Base
−→ D 2
[where the vertical arrows are the natural projection functors; the horizontal ar-
rows are equivalences of categories]. Finally, each of the composite functors of this
diagram is rigid.
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). Since iso-subanchors are manifestly pre-
served by any equivalence of categories, it follows from our assumption thatC1, C2
are of quasi-isotropic type that Ψ preserves isotropic objects. Now, with the excep-
tion of the ﬁnal statement concerning the rigidity of the composite functors, the
remainder of assertion (i) follows formally from [the deﬁnitions and] Proposition
1.9, (v), (vi), (vii). The ﬁnal statement concerning the rigidity of the composite
functors may be veriﬁed as follows: By Proposition 1.13, (ii), it suﬃces to show,
for each A ∈ Ob(Cistr) that the automorphism α ∈O ×(A) induced by an automor-
phism ∈ Aut(C1 →C istr
1 )i s trivial. But, by Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (a), (b); (iii), (c),
it suﬃces to show this when A is Frobenius-trivial, in which case the triviality of
α follows from the functoriality of α with respect to base-identity endomorphisms
of A of arbitrary of Frobenius degree [which implies, since C1, C2 are of Frobenius-
normalized type,t h a tαd = α, for all d ∈ N≥1, hence that α is trivial, as desired].
Next, we consider assertion (ii). By assertion (i) [cf. also Proposition 1.9, (v)],
and the characterization of co-angular pre-steps given in Proposition 1.7, (iv), we
reduce immediately to the case where C1, C2 are of isotropic type. Then [since any
equivalence of categories manifestly preserves FSM-morphisms and irreducible mor-
phisms] the fact that Ψ preserves pre-steps follows formally from Proposition 1.14,
(ii), (iii). Since Ψ preserves pre-steps, it thus follows from Proposition 1.8, (iii) [cf.

64 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
also Proposition 1.4, (i)], that Ψ preserves group-like objects. This completes the
proof of assertions (i), (ii).
Next, we consider assertion (iii). First, I claim that to verify assertion (iii), it
suﬃces to prove that, for each primep1 ∈ Primes, there exists a primep2 ∈ Primes,
which is equal to p1 if C1, C2 are not of group-like type, such that Ψ istr maps p1-
Frobenius morphismsto p2-Frobenius morphisms. Indeed, the assignment p1 ↦→ p2
determines a homomorphism of monoids
Ψ N≥ 1 : N≥1 → N≥1
which [by considering a quasi-inverse to Ψ] is easily seen to be an automorphism.
Moreover, by Proposition 1.10, (v), the condition of the claim implies that Ψ istr
preserves morphisms of Frobenius type, hence alsolinear morphisms[by Proposition
1.7, (iii)], and maps morphisms of Frobenius degreed to morphisms of Frobenius
degree Ψ N≥ 1 (d) [i.e., since arbitrary morphisms may be written as composites of
prime-Frobenius morphisms and linear morphisms — cf. Remark 1.1.1; Deﬁnition
1.3, (iv), (a); Proposition 1.10, (v)]. Since the isotropiﬁcation functor preserves
Frobenius degrees, this implies that Ψ maps morphisms of Frobenius degreed to
morphisms of Frobenius degree ΨN≥ 1 (d), hence that Ψ preserves linear morphisms
and morphisms of Frobenius type[by Proposition 1.7, (iii)]. Moreover, by assertions
(i), (ii), Ψ preservesisometric pre-stepsand pre-steps, hencebase-isomorphisms [i.e.,
composites of pre-steps and morphisms of Frobenius type — cf. Proposition 1.7,
(ii)], pull-back morphisms [cf. Proposition 1.7, (ii)], isometries [i.e., morphisms that
map via the isotropiﬁcation functor to composites of a morphism of Frobenius type
and a pull-back morphism — cf. Propositions 1.4, (i), (v); 1.9, (v)], co-angular
morphisms [cf. Deﬁnition 1.2, (iii); assertion (i) for isometric pre-steps], and LB-
invertible morphisms. Now it follows immediately from the deﬁnition of Cpf [cf.
Deﬁnition 3.1, (iii)] that we obtain a 1-unique 1-commutative diagram as in the
statement of assertion (iii). Finally, to verify the asserted rigidity of composite
functors, it suﬃces [cf. the argument applied in the proof of assertion (i)] to apply
Proposition 1.13, (ii), and to consider the functoriality of the automorphisms in
question with respect to base-identity endomorphisms of Frobenius-trivial objects
of arbitrary Frobenius degree. This completes the proof of the claim.
Thus, to complete the proof of assertion (iii), we may assume [for the remainder
of the proof of assertion (iii)] that C1, C2 are of isotropic type [cf. assertion (i)].
Then it suﬃces to prove that, for each primep1 ∈ Primes, there exists a primep2 ∈
Primes, which is equal top1 if C1, C2 are not of group-like type, such that Ψ mapsp1-
Frobenius morphismsto p2-Frobenius morphisms. Let us call an objectA1 ∈ Ob(C1)
(p1,p2)-admissible if Ψ maps every p1-Frobenius morphism with domain A1 to a
p2-Frobenius morphism of C2. Now let us consider the following assertions:
(F1) For each prime p1 ∈ Primes, there exist a prime p2 ∈ Primes and a
(p1,p2)-admissible object of C1.
(F2) For every pair of primes p1,p2 ∈ Primes and every morphism ζ1 : A1 →
B1 in C1, A1 is (p1,p2)-admissible if and only if B1 is.

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 65
(F3) If C1, C2 are not of group-like type, then for each primep ∈ Primes,t h e r e
exist a (p, p)-admissible object of C1.
Observe, moreover, that since C1 is connected, to complete the proof of assertion
(iii), it suﬃces to prove (F1), (F2), (F3).
First, we consider assertion (F1). Let us ﬁrst consider the case where C1, C2
are of group-like type. Then all pre-steps of C1, C2 are isomorphisms; Ψ preserves
base-isomorphisms. Thus, for any A1 ∈ Ob(C1), the prime-Frobenius morphisms
with domainA1 are precisely the irreducible base-isomorphisms with domainA1 [cf.
Proposition 1.14, (i)]. In particular, Ψ preserves the prime-Frobenius morphisms;
hence, we conclude that assertion (F1) holds. Next, let us consider the case where
C1, C2 are not of group-like type.T h e ni fA1 is non-group-like, then [cf. Deﬁnition
1.3, (i), (a); Proposition 1.8, (iii)], there exists a base-isomorphic [i.e., toA1], hence
non-group-like, Frobenius-trivial object of C1. Thus, we may assume without loss
of generality that A1 is Frobenius-trivial. Then for any p1 ∈ Primes, there exists a
base-identity [hence Div-identity] p1-Frobenius endomorphism φ1 of A1. Since [by
assertion (ii)] Ψ preserves pre-steps, it thus follows formally from the characteriza-
tion of “Div-identity prime-Frobenius endomorphisms” given in Proposition 1.14,
(v), that Ψ maps φ1 to a prime-Frobenius endomorphism of A2
def
=Ψ ( A1). This
completes the proof of assertion (F1).
Next, we consider assertion (F2). First, observe that if the morphismζ1 : A1 →
B1 is a pre-step, then [since, by assertion (ii), Ψ preserves pre-steps] it follows by
applying Proposition 1.14, (iv), to commutative diagrams such as the one given in
Proposition 1.10, (i), that assertion (F2) holds. Thus, by Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (a),
(b), (c), we may assume without loss of generality thatB1 is Frobenius-trivial,a n d
that ζ1 is a pull-back morphism. Now, by applying Proposition 1.11, (iii), it follows
that for every p1 ∈ Primes, there exist base-identity p1-Frobenius endomorphisms
φ1 ∈ EndC(A1), ψ1 ∈ EndC(B1) such that ψ1 ◦ζ1 = ζ1 ◦φ1. In particular, if we
write φ2
def
=Ψ ( φ1), ψ2
def
=Ψ ( ψ1), ζ2
def
=Ψ ( ζ1), then ψ2 ◦ζ2 = ζ2 ◦φ2,a n dφ2, ψ2 are
irreducible. Thus, by Proposition 1.14, (iv), we obtain that φ2 is a p2-Frobenius
morphism if and only if ψ2 is. This completes the proof of assertion (F2).
Finally, we consider assertion (F3). Let A1 ∈ Ob(C1)b ea non-group-like,
Frobenius-trivial object [cf. the proof of assertion (F1)]. By assertions (F1), (F2),
it follows already that Ψ preserves prime-Frobenius morphisms. Thus, to complete
the proof of assertion (F3), [since the Frobenius degree of a prime-Frobenius mor-
phism is always a prime number] it suﬃces to show that if ζ1,θ1 ∈ EndC1 (A1)
are prime-Frobenius base-identity endomorphisms such that degFr(ζ1) < degFr(θ1),
then degFr(ζ2) < degFr(θ2)[ w h e r eζ2
def
=Ψ ( ζ1), θ2
def
=Ψ ( θ1)]. But, by the ﬁrst
equivalence of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d) [cf. also Proposition 1.10, (i)],
the condition “degFr(ζ1) < degFr(θ1)” is equivalent to the following condition:
If we write βζ1 (respectively, βθ1 ) for the step “β ◦α” of Proposition 1.14,
(v), obtained when one takes “ φ”o f loc. cit. to be ζ1 (respectively, θ1)
[and “ α”o floc. cit. to be some ﬁxed step], then βθ1 = γ1 ◦βζ1 ,f o rs o m e
step γ1.

66 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Thus, if we write βζ2 (respectively, βθ2 ) for the step “ β ◦α” of Proposition 1.14,
(v), obtained when one takes “ φ”o f loc. cit. to be ζ2 (respectively, θ2)[ a n d“α”
of loc. cit. to be some ﬁxed step], then βθ2 = γ2 ◦βζ2 , for some step γ2 [since, by
assertion (ii), we already know that Ψ preserves pre-steps], which [again by the ﬁrst
equivalence of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d); Proposition 1.10, (i)] implies
that degFr(ζ2) < degFr(θ2), as desired. This completes the proof of assertion (F3),
hence also the proof of assertion (iii).
Next, let us observe that by assertion (i) [cf. also Proposition 1.9, (v)], it
suﬃces to verify assertions (iv), (v), under the further assumption that C1, C2 are
of isotropic type; thus, we assume for the remainder of the proof of Theorem 3.4
that C1, C2 are of isotropic type. Also, to simplify notation [for the remainder of
the proof of Theorem 3.4], let us write
Pi
def
= Cpl-bk
i
[cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (c)], for i =1 , 2.
Next, let us consider assertion (iv). Now, for i =1 , 2, it follows formally [in
light of our assumption that Di is Frobenius-slim] from Proposition 3.3, (i) [cf. also
Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (a), (b); (iii), (c)], that if C ∈ Ob(Ci), then the endomorphisms
of O⊿(C) are precisely the endomorphisms γ ∈ EndCi (C) such that the following
condition is satisﬁed:
There exist pre-steps φ : A → B, ψ : A → C and endomorphisms α ∈
EndCi (A), β ∈ EndCi (B) such that β ◦φ = φ ◦α, γ ◦ψ = ψ ◦α, and,
moreover, α arises as the endomorphism of A induced by the image of
1 ∈ Z≥0 ⊆ F via a homomorphism of monoidsF → End((Pi)A →C i)bs-iso.
By assertions (ii), (iii), it follows that Ψ preserves pre-steps, base-isomorphisms,
and pull-back morphisms, hence that Ψ preserves endomorphisms satisfying the
above condition. Thus, we conclude that Ψ preserves the submonoids “ O⊿(−)”,
“ O×(−)”, as desired. The existence of a a 1-unique functor Ψun-tr : Cun-tr
1 →C un-tr
2
that ﬁts into a 1-commutative diagram as in the statement of assertion (iv) then
follows formally from the deﬁnition of “ Cun-tr
1 ”, “ Cun-tr
2 ”; since “ Cun-tr
1 ”, “ Cun-tr
2 ”
are of unit-trivial type, the asserted rigidity follows formally from Proposition 1.13,
(ii).
Thus, to complete the proof of assertion (iv), it suﬃces to show that Ψ N≥ 1 is
the identity automorphism. If C1, C2 are not of group-like type, then this already
follows formally from assertion (iii). Thus, let us assume for the remainder of the
proof of assertion (iv) that C1, C2 are of group-like type. Observe that there exists
an object A1 ∈ Ob(C1) such that A2
def
=Ψ ( A1)i s Frobenius-compact[cf. Deﬁnition
3.1; the fact that Ψ is an equivalence of categories]. By Proposition 1.10, (vi), A1,
A2 are Frobenius-trivial.L e t φ1 ∈ EndC1 (A1)b ea base-identity prime-Frobenius
endomorphism. By assertion (iii), φ2
def
=Ψ ( φ1) is also a prime-Frobenius morphism.
Write φ2 = α ◦ψ2,w h e r eψ2 is a base-identity prime-Frobenius endomorphism of

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 67
A2,a n dα ∈ AutC2 (A2) [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (ii)]. Now since C1, C2 are of Frobenius-
normalized type [cf. Deﬁnition 3.1, (i), (c)], it follows that for every u1 ∈O ×(A1),
up1
1 ◦φ1 = φ1 ◦u1 [where p1
def
=d e gFr(φ1)]. Thus, for u2 ∈O ×(A2), we obtain
up1
2 ◦φ2 = φ2 ◦u2 = α ◦ψ2 ◦u2 = α ◦up2
2 ◦ψ2
= α ◦up2
2 ◦α−1 ◦α ◦ψ2 = α ◦up2
2 ◦α−1 ◦φ2
[where p2
def
=d e gFr(φ2)], hence [by the total epimorphicity of C2]
up1
2 = α ◦up2
2 ◦α−1
— i.e., α acts on O×(A2)pf by multiplication by p1/p2.S i n c eA2 is Frobenius-
compact, we thus conclude that p1 = p2. This completes the proof of assertion
(iv).
Finally, we consider assertion (v). Now, for i =1 , 2, if A ∈ Ob(Ci)=O b (Pi),
AD
def
= Base(A) ∈ Ob(Di), then the natural projection functor Ci →D i determines
a natural equivalence of categories
(Pi)A
∼
→ (Di)AD
[cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (c)]. Moreover, if A′ ∈ Ob(Ci)=O b (Pi), A′
D
def
= Base(A′) ∈
Ob(Di), then any arrow A′ → A determines a functor
(Pi)A′ → (Pi)A
by sending an object φ : C′ → A′ of (Pi)A′ to the object C → A of (Pi)A which
is the pull-back morphism of Ci that appears in the factorization of the composite
C′ → A′ → A given in Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv), (a). Moreover, one veriﬁes immediately
that this functor ﬁts into a natural 1-commutative diagram
(Pi)A′ −→ (Pi)A
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
(D
i)A′
D
−→ (Di)AD
[where the upper horizontal arrow is the functor just deﬁned; the vertical arrows are
the equivalences that arise from the natural projection functor Ci →D i;t h el o w e r
horizontal arrow is the natural functor [cf. §0] determined by the arrow A′
D → AD
obtained by projecting the given arrow A′ → A to Di].
Next, observe that since the category Di, hence also the categories ( Di)AD ,
(Pi)A,a r eslim, it follows that the collection of categories “(Pi)A”[ w h e r ei is ﬁxed;
A ranges over the objects ofCi] and functors “(Pi)A′ → (Pi)A” [arising from arrows
A′ → A of Ci] determine a 2-slim [cf. Deﬁnition A.1, (i)] 2 -category of 1-categories,
whose “coarsiﬁcation” [cf. Deﬁnition A.1, (ii)] we denote by Qi, together with a
natural functor
Ci →Q i

68 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
[i.e., which maps A ↦→ (Pi)A,( A′ → A) ↦→{ (Pi)A′ → (Pi)A}]. Similarly, the
collection of categories “(Di)AD ”[ w h e r ei is ﬁxed; AD ranges over the objects ofDi]
and functors “( Di)A′
D
→ (Di)AD ” [arising from arrowsA′
D → AD of Di] determine
a2 -category of 1-categories, whose coarsiﬁcation we denote by Ei, together with a
natural functor
Di →E i
— which, in fact, may be identiﬁed with the“slim exponentiation functor”of Propo-
sition A.2, hence, in particular, is anequivalence of categories. Thus, since the nat-
ural projection functor Ci →D i is essentially surjective [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (a)],
it follows that the natural projection functor Ci →D i induces a faithful, essentially
surjective functor
Qi →E i
which may be composed with a quasi-inverse to the natural equivalence Di
∼
→E i
just discussed to obtain a faithful, essentially surjective functor
Qi →D i
[which is well-deﬁned up to isomorphism].
Next, let us observe that if A, A′ ∈ Ob(Ci), AD
def
= Base(A), A′
D
def
= Base(A′),
then any morphism φD : AD → A′
D may be written in the form
φD = Base(ψ) ◦Base(γ) ◦Base(α)−1
—w h e r eα : B → A, γ : B → C,a r e pre-steps; ψ : C → A′ is a pull-back
morphism [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (b), (c)]. Since [by the above discussion] anybase-
isomorphism ζ: D → E of Ci induces an equivalence of categories(Pi)DD
∼
→ (Pi)ED
[where D,E ∈ Ob(Ci), DD
def
= Base(D), ED
def
= Base(E)], it thus follows that any
collection of morphisms α, γ, ψ as just described determine a “new functor”
(Pi)AD → (Pi)A′
D
[i.e., by inverting the equivalence of categories induced by α and then composing
with the functors induced by γ, ψ]. Thus, by enlarging the 2-slim 2-category of
1-categories considered above [i.e., whose coarsiﬁcation we calledQi] by considering
these “new functors”, we obtain a [slightly larger] 2-slim 2-category of 1-categories,
whose coarsiﬁcation we denote by Ri. In particular, we obtain a [faithful] embed-
ding Qi ↪→R i with the property that the functorQi →D i considered above admits
a natural extension to a functor
Ri →D i
which [by the above discussion] is clearly an equivalence of categories.
On the other hand, since [by assertions (ii), (iii)] Ψ preserves pre-steps, pull-
back morphisms,a n dfactorizations as in Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv), (a), it follows that Ψ

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 69
induces a 1-commutative diagram
C1
Ψ
−→ C 2
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
Q
1
Ψ Q
−→ Q 2
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
R1
Ψ R
−→ R 2
— where the vertical functors are the natural functors of the above discussion,
and the the horizontal functors are equivalences of categoriesinduced by Ψ. Thus,
by composing with the natural equivalences of categories Ri
∼
→D i of the above
discussion, we obtain a 1-commutative diagram as in the statement of assertion
(v), which is clearly 1 -unique [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (a), (b), (c)]. Finally, the
asserted rigidity follows formally from Proposition 1.13, (i). This completes the
proof of assertion (v). ⃝
Remark 3.4.1. With regard to assumption (b) of Theorem 3.4, (iii), (iv), (v), we
observe the following: Suppose, in the situation of Theorem 3.4, that C
1, C2 are of
group-like and quasi-isotropic type. Then if Ψ and some quasi-inverse to Ψ preserve
Frobenius degrees, then they also preservebase-isomorphisms. Indeed, by Theorem
3.4, (i), we may assume, without loss of generality, that C1, C2 are of isotropic
type. Then if Ψ and some quasi-inverse to Ψ preserve Frobenius degrees, then they
preserve linear morphisms, hence morphisms of Frobenius type[cf. Proposition 1.7,
(iii)] and base-isomorphisms [i.e., morphisms of Frobenius type, since C1, C2 are of
group-like and isotropic type — cf. Propositions 1.4, (i); 1.7, (ii); 1.8, (iii)].
One way to understand the meaning of the conditions imposed in the various
portions of Theorem 3.4 is by considering examples in which some of the conditions
hold, but others do not.
Example 3.5. Base Categories with FSMI-endomorphisms. Let D be
a one-object category whose unique object has endomorphism monoid F; C ao n e -
object category whose unique object has endomorphism monoid F × F.T h u s ,t h e
projection F × F → F to the ﬁrst factor determines a functor C→D ; C may
be identiﬁed with the elementary Frobenioid determined by the [manifestly non-
dilating] monoid on D that assigns to the unique object of D the monoid Z≥0 and
to every morphism of D the identity automorphism of Z≥0.I n p a r t i c u l a r ,C is a
Frobenioid of Frobenius-normalized and isotropic type,w h i c hi snot of group-like type
[cf. Proposition 1.5, (i), (ii)]. On the other hand, one veriﬁes immediately that every
morphism of D is an FSM-morphism, and that the endomorphism 1 ∈ Z≥0 ⊆ F
of the unique object of D is irreducible.T h u s ,D admits an FSMI-endomorphism,
which implies [cf. §0] that D fails to be of FSMFF-type. Moreover, the self-
equivalence of C determined by the automorphism of monoids
F × F
∼
→ F × F

70 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
given by switching the two factors clearly fails to preserve pre-steps [cf. Theorem
3.4, (ii)].
Example 3.6. Frobenioids of Standard and Group-like Type. Let
G
def
= Z ⊕
( ⨁
p∈Primes
Z/pZ
)
[regarded as an abelian group]; D a one-object category whose unique object has
endomorphism monoid FG; C a one-object category whose unique object has endo-
morphism monoid FG × FG.T h u s , i fA ∈ Ob(D), then each automorphism of an
object of D arising from an element Aut(DA →D ) is contained in the subgroup of
inﬁnitely divisible elements of G [cf. the proof of Proposition 1.13, (iii)], hence is
trivial —t h a ti st os a y ,D is slim. Moreover, the projection FG × FG → FG to the
ﬁrst factor determines a functor C→D ; C may be identiﬁed with the elementary
Frobenioiddetermined by the [manifestlynon-dilating] monoid on D that assigns to
the unique object of D the monoid G and to every morphism ofD the identity auto-
morphism of G.I np a r t i c u l a r ,C is a Frobenioid of Frobenius-normalized, isotropic,
and group-like type [cf. Proposition 1.5, (i), (iii)]. One veriﬁes immediately that
every morphism of D is either an isomorphism or a non-monomorphism [cf. the
existence of the torsion subgroup ⨁
p∈Primes Z/pZ ⊆ G], and that the irreducible
morphisms of D are precisely the morphisms that project via the natural surjection
FG → N≥1 to primes of N≥1. Thus, it follows immediately that D is of FSM-,
hence also of FSMFF-type. Moreover, since Gpf ∼= Q ̸= 0, and the ﬁrst factor of
FG in the product FG × FG commutes with the G [i.e., “ O×(−)”] of the second
factor of FG, it follows that the unique object of C is Frobenius-compact.T h u s ,C
is of standard type. On the other hand, the self-equivalence of C determined by the
automorphism of monoids
FG × FG
∼
→ FG × FG
given by switching the two factors clearly fails to preserve base-isomorphisms [cf.
Theorem 3.4, (iii)].
Example 3.7. Dilating Monoids. Let G, D be as in Example 3.6; Φ the
monoid on D that associates to the unique object of D the monoid G × Z≥0 and to
a morphism f ∈ FG of D that projects to an element df ∈ N≥1 the endomorphism
of G × Z≥0 that acts trivially on G and by multiplication by df on Z≥0.T h u s ,[ a s
observed in Example 3.6]D is of FSMFF-type, but Φ clearlyfails to be non-dilating.
Write C
def
= FΦ.T h u s ,C is a Frobenioid of Frobenius-normalized and isotropic type,
which is not of group-like type [cf. Proposition 1.5, (i), (ii)]. Moreover, C is a one-
object category whose unique object has endomorphism monoid M given by the
product set
Z≥0 × (FG × FG)
equipped with the following monoid structure: If a1,a2 ∈ Z≥0; b1,b2 ∈ FG × FG,
where b1 projects to an element (n, m) ∈ N≥1 × N≥1,t h e n
(a1,b1) · (a2,b2)=( a1 + n · m · a2,b1 · b2)

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 71
[cf. the description of elementary Frobenioids in Deﬁnition 1.1, (iii)]. Thus, by
switching the two factors of FG, and keeping the unique factor of Z≥0 ﬁxed, we
obtain an automorphism of the monoid M, hence a self-equivalence of C,t h a t
preserves pre-steps [cf. Theorem 3.4, (ii)], but fails to preserve base-isomorphisms
[cf. Theorem 3.4, (iii)].
Example 3.8. Permutation of Primes. Let α : N≥1
∼
→ N≥1 be an automor-
phism of monoids of order 2; N
def
=( N≥1)gp [so α acts on N]; U
def
= Q; V
def
= Q;
W
def
= Q; G
def
= U ⋊N,w h e r ew el e tn ∈ N (⊆ Q)a c to nU by n−1; D the one-object
category whose unique object has endomorphism monoidG; Φ the [manifestly non-
dilating] monoid on D that associates to the unique object of D the monoid V ×W
and to a morphism g ∈ G that projects to an element n ∈ N the automorphism of
V × W given by (α(n),α(n) · n−1) [i.e., the automorphism that acts on V by α(n)
and on W by α(n) ·n−1]; C
def
= FΦ.T h u s ,C is a Frobenioid of Frobenius-normalized,
isotropic, and group-like type[cf. Proposition 1.5, (i), (iii)]; the category D is man-
ifestly of FSM-, hence also of FSMFF-type [cf. §0]. Since the unique object of C
has “ O×(−)” equal toV ×W, it follows from our deﬁnition of Φ that this object is
Frobenius-compact.T h u s ,C is of standard type. On the other hand, if A ∈ Ob(D),
then Aut(DA →D ) ∼= G; since there exist injections of monoids F ↪→ G,i tt h u s
follows that D fails to be Frobenius-slim. The monoid M of endomorphisms of the
unique object of C may be described as the product set
U × V × W × N × N≥1
equipped with the following monoid structure: if u1,u2 ∈ U; v1,v2 ∈ V ; w1,w2 ∈
W; n1,n2 ∈ N; m1,m2 ∈ N≥1,t h e n
(u1,v1,w1,n1,m1) · (u2,v2,w2,n2,m2)=
(u1 + n−1
1 · u2,v1 + m1 · α(n1) · v2,w1 + m1 · α(n1) · n−1
1 · w2,n1 · n2,m1 · m2)
[cf. the description of elementary Frobenioids in Deﬁnition 1.1, (iii)]. In particular,
a routine veriﬁcation reveals that the assignment
(u, v, w, n, m) ↦→ (v,u,w,α (n)−1 · m−1,α(m))
[where u ∈ U, v ∈ V , w ∈ W, n ∈ N, m ∈ N≥1] determines anautomorphism of the
monoid M, hence a self-equivalence ofC, which clearlypreserves base-isomorphisms,
but fails to preserve “ O×(−)” [i.e., the subspace {0}× V × W ⊆ U × V × W]o r
Frobenius degrees[when α is not equal to the identity] — cf. Theorem 3.4, (iii),
(iv).
Example 3.9. Non-preservation of Units. Let N
def
=( N≥1)gp; U
def
= Q;
V
def
= Q; W
def
= Z≥0; G
def
= U ⋊ N,w h e r ew el e tn ∈ N (⊆ Q)a c to n U by n−1;
D the one-object category whose unique object has endomorphism monoid G;Φ
the [manifestly non-dilating] monoid on D that associates to the unique object of

72 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
D the monoid V × W and to a morphism g ∈ G that projects to an element n ∈ N
the automorphism of V × W given by (n, 1) [i.e., the automorphism that acts on
V by n and on W by 1]; C
def
= FΦ.T h u s ,C is a Frobenioid of Frobenius-normalized
and isotropic type,w h i c hi snot of group-like type[cf. Proposition 1.5, (i), (ii)]; D is
manifestly of FSM-, hence alsoof FSMFF-type [cf. §0]. Thus, C is of standard type.
On the other hand, [cf. Example 3.8] D fails to be Frobenius-slim. The monoid M
of endomorphisms of the unique object of C may be described as the product set
U × V × W × N × N≥1
equipped with the following monoid structure: if u1,u2 ∈ U; v1,v2 ∈ V ; w1,w2 ∈
W; n1,n2 ∈ N; m1,m2 ∈ N≥1,t h e n
(u1,v1,w1,n1,m1) · (u2,v2,w2,n2,m2)=
(u1 + n−1
1 · u2,v1 + m1 · n1 · v2,w1 + m1 · w2,n1 · n2,m1 · m2)
[cf. the description of elementary Frobenioids in Deﬁnition 1.1, (iii)]. In particular,
a routine veriﬁcation reveals that the assignment
(u, v, w, n, m) ↦→ (v,u,w,n −1 · m−1,m )
[where u ∈ U, v ∈ V , w ∈ W, n ∈ N, m ∈ N≥1] determines anautomorphism of the
monoid M, hence a self-equivalence of C, which clearly fails to preserve “ O×(−)”,
“ O⊿(−)” [i.e., the subspaces {0}× V ×{ 0}, {0}× V × W ⊆ U × V × W]—c f .
Theorem 3.4, (iv).
Example 3.10. Non-slim Base Categories. Let G be a group, whose center
we denote byZ(G); D a one-object category whose unique object has endomorphism
monoid G; C a one-object category whose unique object has endomorphism monoid
G × F. Thus, the projection G × F → G determines a functor C→D ; C may
be identiﬁed with the elementary Frobenioid determined by the [manifestly non-
dilating] monoid on D that assigns to the unique object of D the monoid Z≥0 and
to every morphism of D the identity automorphism of Z≥0.I n p a r t i c u l a r ,C is a
Frobenioid of Frobenius-normalized and isotropic type,w h i c hi snot of group-like
type [cf. Proposition 1.5, (i), (ii)]; D is manifestly of FSM-, hence also of FSMFF-
type [cf. §0]. Thus, C is of standard type. On the other hand, if α : F → Z(G)
is any nontrivial homomorphism of monoids that factors as the composite of the
natural surjection F → N≥1 with a homomorphism of monoids N≥1 → Z(G), then
the automorphism of monoids
G × F
∼
→ G × F
(g,f ) ↦→ (g · α(f),f )
[where g ∈ G, f ∈ F] determines a self-equivalence C
∼
→C which clearly fails to
preserve base-identity endomorphisms of Frobenius type[cf. Theorem 3.4, (v)].

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 73
Finally, before proceeding, we consider the case of Frobenioids of group-like
type in a bit more detail.
Proposition 3.11. (Frobenioids of Isotropic, Unit-trivial, and Group-
like Type) For i =1 , 2,l e tΦi be the zero monoid [more precisely: any functor
Di → Mon all of whose values are monoids of cardinality one] on a connected,
totally epimorphic category Di of FSMFF-type ; Ci → FΦi a Frobenioid of
isotropic, unit-trivial,a n dgroup-like type;
Ψ: C1
∼
→C 2
an equivalence of categories.T h e n :
(i) The functor Ci → FΦi is an equivalence of categories.
(ii) Ψ preserves base-isomorphisms, pull-back morphisms, linear mor-
phisms,a n dmorphisms of Frobenius type.
(iii) Suppose that bothΨ and some quasi-inverse to Ψ preserve base-identity
endomorphisms. Then there exists a 1-unique functor ΨBase : D1 →D 2 that
ﬁts into a 1-commutative diagram
C1
Ψ
−→ C 2
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
D
1
Ψ Base
−→ D 2
[where the vertical arrows are the natural projection functors; the horizontal ar-
rows are equivalences of categories]. Finally, if D1, D2 are slim, then each of the
composite functors of this diagram is rigid.
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). By Proposition 3.3, (iii), (iv), the functor
Ci → FΦi is essentially surjective and faithful. Since the Frobenioid Ci is of group-
like and isotropic type, it follows that every pre-step of Ci is an isomorphism [cf.
Propositions 1.4, (i); 1.8, (iii)], hence that the Frobenioid Ci is of Aut-ample and
base-trivial [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (b)], as well as unit-trivial, type. Thus, it follows
from Proposition 3.3, (v), that the functorCi → FΦi is an equivalence of categories.
This completes the proof of assertion (i).
Next, we consider assertion (ii). Observe that since Di is of FSMFF-type,i t
follows that Di has no FSMI-endomorphisms [cf. §0], hence that a morphism of Ci
is an FSMI-endomorphism if and only if it is a prime-Frobenius endomorphism[cf.
Propositions 1.11, (vi); 1.14, (i); the evident structure of FΦi ]. Thus, Ψ preserves
the prime-Frobenius endomorphisms, hence also prime-Frobenius morphisms [since
every prime-Frobenius morphism is abstractly equivalent to a prime-Frobenius en-
domorphism]. But this implies that Ψ preserves the morphisms of Frobenius type
[cf. Proposition 1.10, (v)], hence also the linear morphisms [cf. Proposition 1.7,
(iii)]. Since the [co-angular] pre-steps of Ci are isomorphisms [cf. Proposition 1.8,

74 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(iii)], it thus follows that Ψ preserves the pull-back morphisms [cf. Proposition 1.7,
(iii)], as well as the base-isomorphisms [cf. Proposition 1.7, (ii)]. This completes
the proof of assertion (ii).
Finally, we consider assertion (iii). WriteN for the one-object category whose
unique object has endomorphism monoid equal to N≥1.T h e nw eh a v eequivalences
of categories
Ci
∼
→ FΦi
∼
→D i ×N
[cf. assertion (i)]. Moreover, one veriﬁes immediately that the base-identity endo-
morphisms of Ci are precisely the endomorphisms of Ci
∼
→D i ×N that arise from
elements of N≥1; let us refer to such endomorphisms as “ N≥1-endomorphisms”.
Thus, it follows from our assumption concerning the preservation of base-identity
endomorphisms that the N≥1-endomorphisms are preserved by Ψ. Note, more-
over, that Di may be reconstructed from Ci by considering equivalence classes of
morphisms of Ci, where two morphisms of Ci are regarded as equivalent if they
admit composites with an N≥1-endomorphism which are equal. Thus, we obtain a
1-commutative diagram as in the statement of assertion (ii). Finally, the rigidity
assertion in the statement of assertion (ii) follows immediately from Proposition
1.13, (i). ⃝

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 75
Section 4: Category-theoreticity of the Divisor Monoid
In the present §4, we show that the monoid on the base categorythat appears
in the deﬁnition of a Frobenioid [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3] may, under suitable conditions,
be reconstructed entirelycategory-theoretically. Together with the results of§3, this
allows us to conclude, under suitable conditions, that thefunctor to an elementary
Frobenioid that appears in the deﬁnition of a Frobenioid [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3] may
be recovered entirely from the structure of a Frobenioid as anabstract category[cf.
Corollary 4.11].
In the following discussion, we maintain the notation of §1, §2, §3. Also, we
assume that we have been given a divisorial monoid Φ on a connected, totally
epimorphic category D and a Frobenioid C→ FΦ.
Proposition 4.1. (Primary Steps) Suppose further that C is of perfect and
isotropic type, and that Φ is perf-factorial.L e t A ∈ Ob(C) be Div-Frobenius-
trivial;
φ : B → A, ψ : A → C, δ : D → E, ϵ : E → F, ι : I → F
steps of C.F o r n ∈ N≥1,l e tαn ∈ EndC(A) be a Div-identity endomorphism
of Frobenius type such that degFr(αn)= n.T h e n :
(i) φ is primary if and only if, for every factorization φ = φA ◦φB,w h e r e
φB : B → B′, φA : B′ → A are steps, there exists a commutative diagram
B
φB
−→ B′ φA
−→ A
⏐⏐↓β′
⏐⏐↓αn
B′′ ζ
−→ A
where n ∈ N≥1; β′ is a morphism of Frobenius type; andζ= φ◦ζ′;a n dζ′ : B′′ → B
is a pre-step.
(ii) Suppose that φ is primary. Then the composite ψ ◦φ : B → C,h e n c e
also ψ,i s primary if and only if, for every factorization ψ ◦φ = ψ′ ◦φ′,w h e r e
φ′ : B → A′, ψ′ : A′ → C are steps, there exist factorizationsφ = ζ◦φ′′, φ′ = ζ′ ◦φ′′,
where φ′′ : B → A′′ is a step, and ζ: A′′ → A, ζ′ : A′′ → A′ are pre-steps.
(iii) ϵ∗(Div(ϵ)),ι∗(Div(ι)) ∈ Φ(F) [where we write ϵ∗, ι∗ for the respective
bijections induced by the functor Φ] have disjoint supports [cf. Deﬁnition 2.4,
(i), (d)] if and only if every pre-step ζ : Z → F such that there exist pre-steps ϵ′,
ι′ satisfying ϵ = ζ◦ϵ′, ι= ζ◦ι′ is, in fact, an isomorphism. In this case, we shall
say that ϵ, ιare co-primary.I f ϵ, ιare co-primary, then there exists acartesian
diagram in the category of pre-steps
U
ϵ′
−→ E
⏐⏐
↓
ι′
⏐
⏐
↓
ϵ
I
ι
−→ F

76 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
such that ϵ∗(ϵ′
∗(Div(ϵ′))) = ι∗(Div(ι)), ι∗(ι′
∗(Div(ι′))) = ϵ∗(Div(ϵ));i f ϵ, ιare pri-
mary,t h e ns oa r eϵ′, ι′.
(iv) δ is primary if and only if there exists a p ∈ Prime(Φ(F)) such that the
following condition holds: For every primary ϵ′ : E′ → F such that ϵ′
∗(Div(ϵ′)) ̸∈
p [where we write ϵ′
∗ for the bijection induced by the functor Φ], there exists a
factorization ϵ = ϵ′ ◦ζ,w h e r eζis a pre-step, if and only if there exists a factorization
ϵ ◦δ= ϵ′ ◦θ,w h e r eθ is a pre-step.
(v) ϵ is primary if and only if there exists a p ∈ Prime(Φ(D)) such that the
following condition holds: For every primary δ′ : D → E′ such that Div(δ′) ̸∈ p,
there exists a factorization δ = ζ ◦δ′,w h e r eζ is a pre-step, if and only if there
exists a factorization ϵ ◦δ= θ◦δ′,w h e r eθ is a pre-step.
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). By applying the second equivalence of
categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d), to the various pre-steps over A, it follows
that, if we write xφ
def
= φ∗(Div(φ)) ∈ Φ(A)[ w h e r ew ew r i t eφ∗ for the bijection
induced by the functor Φ], then the condition of assertion (i) may be translated
into the language of monoids as follows:
For every equation xφ = xA + xB in Φ(A), where xA,x B ̸=0 ,w eh a v e
xφ ≼ xA.
Now the equivalence of this condition with the condition thatxφ is primary follows
immediately from the deﬁnition of the term “primary” [cf. §0], together with the
fact that Φ(A)i s perfect [cf. Proposition 1.10, (iii)]. This completes the proof of
assertion (i).
Next, we consider assertion (ii). Again, we apply Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d), to the
various pre-steps over C, to obtain the following translation of the condition of as-
sertion (ii) into thelanguage of monoids [where we set xφ
def
= ψ∗(φ∗(Div(φ))),x ψ
def
=
ψ∗(Div(ψ)) ∈ Φ(C)]:
For every equationxφ +xψ = xφ′ +xψ ′ in Φ(A), where xφ′ ,x ψ ′ ̸=0 ,t h e r e
exists a 0 ̸= xφ′′ ∈ Φ(A) such that xφ′′ ≤ xφ, xφ′′ ≤ xφ′ .
Now the necessity of this condition follows immediately from the structure of the
Φ(A)p,w h e r ep ∈ Prime(Φ(A)) [cf. Deﬁnition 2.4, (i), (b)], whereas the suﬃciency
of this condition follows by takingxφ′ ≤ xψ [cf. Deﬁnition 2.4, (i), (c), (d); the fact
that Φ(A)i s perfect]. This completes the proof of assertion (ii).
Next, we consider assertion (iii). By applying the second equivalence of cat-
egories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d), to the various pre-steps over F, we obtain the
following translation of the condition of assertion (iii) into thelanguage of monoids
[where we set xϵ
def
= ϵ∗(Div(ϵ)),x ι
def
= ι∗(Div(ι)) ∈ Φ(F)]:
Every xζ ∈ Φ(F) such that xζ ≤ xϵ, xζ ≤ xι is, in fact, equal to 0.

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 77
The necessity and suﬃciency of this condition then follow immediately by consid-
ering the “primary factorizations” of xϵ, xι [cf. Deﬁnition 2.4, (i), (c), (d); the
fact that Φ(A)i s perfect]. The cartesian diagram [with the desired properties] then
follows from the fact that “for xU ∈ Φ(F), xϵ + xι ≤ xU if and only if xϵ ≤ xU ,
xι ≤ xU ” [cf. Deﬁnition 2.4, (i), (c), (d); the fact that Φ( A)i s perfect]. This
completes the proof of assertion (iii).
Next, we consider assertion (iv). This time, we apply thesecond equivalence of
categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d), to the various pre-steps over F, to obtain the
following translation of the condition of assertion (iv) concerning p ∈ Prime(Φ(F))
into thelanguage of monoids[where we setxδ
def
= ϵ∗(δ∗((Div(δ))),x ϵ
def
= ϵ∗(Div(ϵ)) ∈
Φ(F)]:
For every primary element xϵ′ /∈ p, xϵ′ ≤ xϵ if and only if xϵ′ ≤ xδ + xϵ.
The necessity and suﬃciency of this condition then follow immediately by com-
paring the “primary factorizations” of xϵ, xδ + xϵ [cf. Deﬁnition 2.4, (i), (c), (d);
the fact that Φ( A)i s perfect]. Also, we observe that assertion (v) follows by an
entirely similar argument obtained by “reversing the direction of the arrows”. This
completes the proof of assertions (iv), (v). ⃝
Theorem 4.2. (Category-theoreticity of Primary Steps) For i =1 , 2,
let Φi be a perf-factorial divisorial monoid on a connected, totally epimorphic
category Di; Ci → FΦi a Frobenioid of standard and isotropic type, which is
not of group-like type;
Ψ: C1
∼
→C 2
an equivalence of categories.T h e n :
(i) Ψ preserves primary steps, Div-identity endomorphisms, Div-Frobenius-
trivial objects,a n duniversally Div-Frobenius-trivial objects.
(ii) There exists a unique isomorphism ΨPrime between the functors
Ob(Cbs-iso
i ) ∋ Ai ↦→ Prime(Φi(Ai))
[where i =1 , 2]o n Cbs-iso
i which satisﬁes the following property: Suppose that A2 =
Ψ(A1); p1 ∈ Prime(Φ1(A1)), p2 ∈ Prime(Φ2(A2)) correspond under ΨPrime.F o r
i =1 , 2, write
{Ai (Ccoa-pre
i )}pi
∼
→ Order(Φi(Ai)pi ); {(Ccoa-pre
i )Ai }pi
∼
→ Order(Φi(Ai)pi )opp
for the respective full subcategories and restricted equivalences of categories deter-
mined by the full subcategory
Order(Φi(Ai)pi ) ⊆ Order(Φi(Ai))

78 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
arising from the submonoid Φi(Ai)pi ⊆ Φi(Ai). Then the map induced by Ψ on
pre-steps [cf. (i); Theorem 3.4, (ii)] induces equivalences of categories
{A1 (Ccoa-pre
1 )}p1
∼
→{ A2 (Ccoa-pre
2 )}p2 ; {(Ccoa-pre
1 )A1 }p1
∼
→{ (Ccoa-pre
2 )A2 }p2
hence equivalences of categories as follows:
Order(Φ1(A1)p1 )
∼
→ Order(Φ2(A2)p2 ); Order(Φ 1(A1)p1 )opp ∼
→ Order(Φ2(A2)p2 )opp
(iii) If, moreover, in the situation of (ii), the Ai are Div-Frobenius-trivial,
then the last two equivalences of categories of (ii) arise from isomorphisms of
monoids
Φ1(A1)p1
∼
→ Φ2(A2)p2 ;Φ 1(A1)p1
∼
→ Φ2(A2)p2
which we shall refer to, respectively, as the right-hand and left-hand isomor-
phisms induced by Ψ [cf. Example 4.3 below].
Proof. First, we observe that by Proposition 1.10, (vi), every group-like object
is Frobenius-trivial, hence, in particular, Div -Frobenius-trivial;m o r e o v e r ,[ b yt h e
deﬁnition of a “group-like object”] every endomorphism of a group-like object is
a Div-identity endomorphism, and every pre-step to or from a group-like object
is an isomorphism [cf. Propositions 1.4, (i), (iii); 1.8, (iii)]. Thus, since Ψ pre-
serves non-group-like objects [cf. Theorem 3.4, (ii)] and pull-back morphisms [cf.
Theorem 3.4, (iii)], we may assume for the remainder of the proof of Theorem 4.2,
without loss of generality, that the objects under consideration are non-group-like.
Now by Proposition 1.14, (v) [cf. also Theorem 3.4, (ii)], it follows immediately
that Ψ preservesnon-group-like Div-Frobenius-trivial objects,a sw e l la sD i v-identity
prime-Frobenius endomorphisms of such objects. Since Ψ preserves morphisms of
Frobenius typeand Frobenius degrees[cf. Theorem 3.4, (iii)], we thus conclude that
to complete the proof of assertion (i), it suﬃces to prove that Ψ preserves primary
steps and Div-identity endomorphisms. Moreover, to prove the remainder of asser-
tion (i) [i.e., that Ψ preserves primary steps and Div-identity endomorphisms]a n d
assertions (ii), (iii), clearly it suﬃces to do so after passing to the perfections of
the C
i [cf. Theorem 3.4, (iii)]; thus, for the remainder of the proof of Theorem 4.2,
we may assume, without loss of generality, that the Ci are of perfect type [cf. also
Proposition 5.5, (iii), below].
Now let A1 ∈ Ob(C1) be a non-group-like Div-Frobenius-trivial object; A2
def
=
Ψ(A1). Then it follows formally from Proposition 4.1, (i), (ii) [cf. also Theorem
3.4, (ii), (iii)] that Ψ maps primary steps to or from A1 to primary steps to or from
A2 in such a way that primary steps B1 → A1, A1 → C1 with primary composite
B1 → C1 are mapped to primary stepsB2 → A2, A2 → C2 with primary composite
B2 → C2.N e x t ,l e t
A1 → F1
be a primary step. Then it follows immediately from Proposition 4.1, (iii), together
with what we have already shown concerning primary steps to or from A1,t h a tΨ
maps primary steps to or from F1 to primary steps to or from F2
def
=Ψ ( F1)i ns u c h

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 79
a way that primary stepsF ′
1 → F1, F1 → F ′′
1 with primary composite F ′
1 → F ′′
1 are
mapped to primary steps F ′
2 → F2, F2 → F ′′
2 with primary composite F ′
2 → F ′′
2 .
[Indeed, to see this, it suﬃces to consider the following two situations [depending on
whether the primary steps A1 → F1, F ′
1 → F1 are co-primary or not]: (a) primary
steps Bi → Ai, Ai → Ci with primary composite such that the primary steps to
or from Fi under consideration are subordinate to the primary composite Bi → Ci;
(b) commutative diagrams
A′
i −→ F ′
i
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
A
i −→ Fi
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
A′′
i −→ F ′′
i
[where i =1 , 2] in which both the upper and lower squares are cartesian diagrams
as in Proposition 4.1, (iii), and all the arrows originating from Ai,a sw e l la st h e
vertical composite A′
i → Ai → A′′
i , are primary steps.]
Next, observe that for a suitable choice ofnon-group-like Div-Frobenius-trivial
A1 [e.g., a Frobenius-trivial A1 — cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (a), (b)], it follows that
for any object C1 ∈ Ob(C1) that is base-isomorphic to A1, there exist pre-steps
B1 → C1, B1 → A1. Moreover, observe that [by applying the equivalences of
categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d)] any primary step to or from B1,a sw e l la s
any primary composite of a primary step to B1 with a primary step from B1,m a y
always be written in the form
D1 → E1
where the composite D1 → E1 → F1 of the above arrowD1 → E1 with some arrow
E1 → F1 factors as a composite D1 → B1 → A1 → F1 in which D1 → B1 is a pre-
step, B1 → A1 is the pre-step introduced above, andA1 → F1 is a primary step [so
in the case of a primary step fromB1, D1 = B1; in the case of a primary step toB1,
E1 = B1]. Thus, by applying Proposition 4.1, (iv) [to the arrows D1 → E1 → F1],
together with what we have already shown concerning primary steps to or from
F1, we conclude that Ψ maps primary steps to or from B1 to primary steps to or
from B2
def
=Ψ ( B1) in such a way that primary steps B′
1 → B1, B1 → B′′
1 with
primary composite B′
1 → B′′
1 are mapped to primary steps B′
2 → B2, B2 → B′′
2
with primary composite B′
2 → B′′
2 .
In a similar vein, we observe that [by applying the equivalences of categories
of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d)] a primary step to or from C1,a sw e l la sa n yprimary
composite of a primary step to C1 with a primary step from C1,m a ya l w a y sb e
written in the form
E1 → F1
where the composite D1 → E1 → F1 of some arrow D1 → E1 with the above
arrow E1 → F1 factors as a composite D1 → B1 → C1 → F1 in which D1 → B1
is a primary pre-step, B1 → C1 is the pre-step introduced above, and C1 → F1
is a pre-step [so in the case of a primary step from C1, E1 = C1; in the case of

80 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
a primary step to C1, F1 = C1]. Thus, by applying Proposition 4.1, (v) [to the
arrows D1 → E1 → F1], together with what we have already shown concerning
primary steps to or from D1 [i.e., where we regard “ D1” as a “sort of B1”, which
is possible in light of the existence of the composite pre-step D1 → B1 → A1], we
conclude that Ψ maps primary steps to or from C1 to primary steps to or from
C2
def
=Ψ ( C1) in such a way that primary steps C′
1 → C1, C1 → C′′
1 with primary
composite C′
1 → C′′
1 are mapped to primary stepsC′
2 → C2, C2 → C′′
2 with primary
composite C′
2 → C′′
2 .
Since C1 was, in eﬀect, allowed to be an arbitrary non-group-like object of
C1, we thus conclude that Ψ preserves primary steps. Moreover, by thinking, for
Ai ∈ Ob(Ci)[ w h e r ei =1 , 2] of an element of Prime(Φ i(Ai)) as an equivalence
class of primary steps to or fromAi [where the correspondence between elements of
Prime(Φi(Ai)) and equivalence classes of primary steps is deﬁned by “Div( −)” —
cf. the equivalences of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d)], we thus obtain that
Ψ induces a bijection
ΨPrime(A1):P r i m e ( Φ1(A1))
∼
→ Prime(Φ2(A2))
[where A2
def
=Ψ ( A1)] as well as corresponding equivalences of categories
{A1 (Ccoa-pre
1 )}p1
∼
→{ A2 (Ccoa-pre
2 )}p2 ; {(Ccoa-pre
1 )A1 }p1
∼
→{ (Ccoa-pre
2 )A2 }p2
[where p1 ∈ Prime(Φ1(A1)), p2 ∈ Prime(Φ2(A2)) correspond via ΨPrime(A1)].
To check thefunctoriality of ΨPrime(−) with respect to arbitrary base-isomor-
phisms, it suﬃces to check it with respect to morphisms of Frobenius typeand pre-
steps [cf. Proposition 1.7, (ii)]. In the case of a morphism of Frobenius type Bi →
Ai [where i =1 , 2], the desired functoriality follows by considering commutative
diagrams
B′
i −→ Bi
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
A′
i −→ Ai
[cf. Proposition 1.10, (i)] — where the vertical morphisms are morphisms of Frobe-
nius type, and the horizontal morphisms areprimary steps. In the case of apre-step
Bi → Ai [where i =1 , 2], the desired functoriality follows by considering a commu-
tative diagram
B′
i −→ Bi
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
C
′
i −→ Ci
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
A′
i −→ Ai
— where all of the morphisms are pre-steps; all of the horizontal morphisms, as well
as the vertical morphisms and composite morphisms of the upper square, are either

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 81
isomorphisms or primary steps; either the vertical morphisms of the lower square
are isomorphisms, or the lower square is acartesian diagram as in Proposition 4.1,
(iii). This completes the proof of the functoriality of ΨPrime(−), hence of assertion
(ii).
Next, we observe that Ψ preserves Div-identity endomorphisms. Indeed, since
the Φi are non-dilating, it follows that if A ∈ Ob(Ci)[ w h e r ei =1 , 2], then α ∈
EndCi (A)i saD i v -identity endomorphism if and only if α admits a factorization
α = β ◦γ,w h e r eβ : B → A is a pull-back morphism, and γ : A → B is a base-
isomorphism, such that for every primary step A′ → A, there exists a commutative
diagram
A′ −→ A
⏐⏐↓γ′
⏐⏐↓γ
B′ −→ B
⏐⏐
↓
β′
⏐
⏐
↓
β
A′′ −→ A
in which the horizontal morphisms are primary steps; the upper horizontal mor-
phism is the given primary step; the equivalence classes of the primary stepsA′ →
A, B′ → B correspond via the bijection Prime(Φi(γ)) : Prime(Φi(B))
∼
→ Prime(Φi(A))
[cf. the functoriality of Ψ Prime(−)]; β′ is a pull-back morphism [cf. Proposition
1.11, (v)]; the primary steps A′ → A, A′′ → A determine the same element of
Prime(Φi(A)). This completes the proof of assertion (i).
Finally, we consider assertion (iii). Thus, we assume that the Ai are Div-
Frobenius-trivial. By considering commutative diagrams of the form
Bi −→ Ai
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
B
′
i −→ Ai
Ai −→ Ci
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
A
i −→ C′
i
— where the vertical morphisms are morphisms of Frobenius type [cf. Proposition
1.10, (i)], the morphisms Ai → Ai are Div-identity endomorphisms, and the hori-
zontal morphisms areprimary steps — it follows that the equivalences of categories
in question arise from bijections of sets
Φ1(A1)p1
∼
→ Φ2(A2)p2 ;Φ 1(A1)p1
∼
→ Φ2(A2)p2
that are compatible both with “ ≤” and with multiplication by elements ofN≥1.I n
light of the well-known structure of the monoids Q≥0, R≥0 [cf. Deﬁnition 2.4, (i),
(b)], this is enough to conclude that these bijections of sets are, in fact, isomor-
phisms of monoids, as desired. This completes the proof of assertion (iii). ⃝
Example 4.3. Independence of Right-hand and Left-hand Isomor-
phisms. As the following example shows, the right-hand and left-hand isomor-
phisms of Theorem 4.2, (iii), do not necessarily coincide [cf. Remark 4.9.1 below]:

82 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Let D be a one-morphism category; Φ the monoid on D whose value on the unique
object of D is the monoid Q≥0. Now we deﬁne a category C as follows: The objects
of C are the elements of Q.T h e morphisms a → b of C from an object a ∈ Q
to an object b ∈ Q are the elements d ∈ N≥1 such that d · a ≤ b; composition of
morphisms is deﬁned by multiplication of elements of N≥1. We shall refer to the
element d ∈ N≥1 determined by a morphism of C as the Frobenius degreeof the
morphism. Thus, we obtain a natural functor
C→ FΦ
by assigning to a morphismφ : a → b [where a, b ∈ Q]t h ezero divisor b − degFr(φ) ·
a ∈ Q≥0 and Frobenius degreedegFr(φ) ∈ N≥1.S i n c eC is clearly connected and
totally epimorphic, this functor determines a pre-Frobenioid structureon C.M o r e -
over, the object 0 ∈ Q is Frobenius-trivial; φ : a → b is a morphism of Frobenius
type if and only ifb =d e gFr(φ) ·a; φ : a → b is a pre-step if and only if degFr(φ)=1 ;
all morphisms of C are base-isomorphisms; all pull-back morphisms of C are iso-
morphisms; all “ O⊿(−)” of C are trivial; no object of C is group-like. Thus, one
veriﬁes immediately that C is a Frobenioid of isotropic type.S i n c eD is clearly of
FSMFF-type, and Φ is non-dilating, it follows that C is also of standard type,o v e r
a slim base category D. Now one veriﬁes immediately that if λ ∈ Q>0, then the
assignment, for a ∈ Q≥0,
a ↦→ a; −a ↦→− λ · a
determines a self-equivalence of categories
Ψλ : C
∼
→C
that preserves Frobenius degrees [cf. Theorem 3.4, (iii)]. On the other hand, it
follows immediately from the construction of Ψ λ that the right-hand isomorphism
of Theorem 4.2, (iii), is the identity on Q≥0, while the left-hand isomorphism of
Theorem 4.2, (iii), is given by multiplication by λ on Q≥0.
In order to proceed further toward the goal of “reconstructing Φ category-
theoretically from C”, it is necessary to ﬁnd natural conditions on the Frobenioid C
that will allow us to rule out“pathologies”of the sort discussed in Example 4.3. One
approach to doing this is the introduction of the birationalization of a Frobenioid,
as follows.
Proposition 4.4. (Birationalization of a Frobenioid I) For A, B ∈ Ob(C),
write:
Hombirat
C (A, B)
def
= lim −→
(A′ → A)∈Ccoa-pre
A
HomC(A′,B )
where the inductive limit is parametrized by [say, some small skeletal subcat-
egory of] Ccoa-pre
A , and the transition morphism induced by a co-angular pre-step
A′′ → A′ [regarded as a morphism inCcoa-pre
A ] is the natural morphismHomC(A′,B ) →
HomC(A′′,B ).T h e n :

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 83
(i) Composition of morphisms in C determines a natural composition map
Hombirat
C (A, B) × Hombirat
C (B,C ) → Hombirat
C (A, C)
[where A, B, C∈ Ob(C)], hence a category Cbirat, whose objects are the objects of
C and whose morphisms are given by “Hombirat
C ”. Moreover, there exists a natural
1-commutative diagram of functors
C− → FΦ
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
Cbirat −→ FΦgp −→ F0D
where the functors between elementary Frobenioids are those induced by the natural
morphisms of monoids Φ → Φgp → 0D; 0D is the monoid on D all of whose values
on objects of D are equal to the monoid with one element [so F0D is the product
category of D with the one-object category determined by the monoid N≥1].
(ii) The functor Cbirat → F0D of (i) determines a structure of Frobenioid
of group-like type on Cbirat. Moreover, the functor C→C birat is faithful.I n
particular, for every A ∈ Ob(C) with image Abirat in Cbirat, the functor C→C birat
determines an injection of groups O⊿(A)gp ↪→O ×(Abirat). We shall refer to the
functor “ O×(−)”o nD associated to the FrobenioidCbirat [cf. Proposition 2.2, (ii),
(iii)] as the rational function monoid of the Frobenioid C.
(iii) There exists a unique subfunctor of groups Φbirat ⊆ Φgp such that
the functor Cbirat → FΦgp of (i) factors through the subcategory FΦbirat ⊆ FΦgp
determined by Φbirat, and, moreover, the resulting functor
Cbirat → FΦbirat
induces, for each Abirat ∈ Ob(Cbirat),a surjection O×(Abirat) ↠ Φbirat(Abirat),
whose kernel is the image, via the injection O⊿(A)gp ↪→O ×(Abirat) of (ii), of
O×(A) ⊆O ⊿(A)gp.
(iv) A morphism of C maps to a(n) co-angular morphism (respectively,iso-
morphism; morphism of Frobenius type; pull-back morphism; morphism
of a given Frobenius degree ; isometry; pre-step; base-isomorphism)o f
Cbirat if and only if it is a(n) co-angular morphism (respectively, co-angular pre-
step; co-angular base-isomorphism; co-angular linear morphism; morphism of a
given Frobenius degree; arbitrary morphism; pre-step; base-isomorphism) of C.A
morphism of Cbirat is a base-identity endomorphism if and only if arises from
ap a i r(α : A′ → A; φ : A′ → A),w h e r eα is a co-angular pre-step in the in-
dexing category of the inductive limit deﬁning Hombirat
C (A, A),a n d α and φ are
base-equivalent. An object of C maps to an isotropic object of Cbirat if and only if
it is an isotropic object of C.

84 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). Given morphismsφ′ : A′ → B, ψ′ : B′ → C
[in C] and co-angular pre-steps α : A′ → A, β : B′ → B [in C], it follows from
Proposition 1.11, (vii), that there exists a commutative diagram
A′′ φ′′
−→ B′ ψ ′
−→ C
⏐⏐
↓
α′
⏐
⏐
↓
β
A
α
←− A′ φ′
−→ B
where α′ [hence also α ◦α′] is a co-angular pre-step. Then we take the composite of
the image of φ′ in Hombirat
C (A, B) with the image ofψ′ in Hombirat
C (B,C )t ob et h e
image of ψ′ ◦φ′′ in Hombirat
C (A, C). To show that this assignment isindependent of
the choice of α′, φ′′, it suﬃces to consider commutative diagrams
A∗ α∗
−→ A′′′ φ′′′
−→ B′
⏐⏐
↓
α′′
⏐
⏐
↓
α′′′
⏐
⏐
↓
β
A′′ α′
−→ A′ φ′
−→ B
[where α′′, α′′′, α∗ are co-angular pre-steps] and to observe that since β is a
monomorphism [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (v), (a)], the fact that
β ◦φ′′′ ◦α∗ = φ′ ◦α′′′ ◦α∗ = φ′ ◦α′ ◦α′′ = β ◦φ′′ ◦α′′
implies that φ′′′ ◦α∗ = φ′′ ◦α′′, i.e., thatψ′ ◦φ′′, ψ′ ◦φ′′′ determine the same element
of Hombirat
C (A, C). Also, one veriﬁes immediately that composite of morphisms of
Hombirat
C (−, −)i s associative. This completes the deﬁnition of the category Cbirat.
Then by assigning to the pair (α : A′ → A, φ′ : A′ → B) the element
Φ(α)−1{Div(φ′) − degFr(φ′) · Div(α)}∈ Φ(A)gp
[cf. Remark 1.1.1] one veriﬁes immediately that the functor C→ FΦ induces a
functor Cbirat → FΦgp , as well as a 1-commutative diagram as in the statement of
assertion (i). This completes the proof of assertion (i).
Next, we observe that it follows formally from the deﬁnition ofCbirat that Cbirat
is connected; moreover, [cf. the discussion of the composition of arrows of Cbirat in
the proof of assertion (i)] thetotal epimorphicity of Cbirat follows immediately from
that of C. Thus, the functor Cbirat → F0D determines a structure of pre-Frobenioid
on Cbirat. Now the portion of assertion (iv) concerningmorphisms of a given Frobe-
nius degree, isometries [cf. the monoid structure of the monoid 0 D!], pre-steps,
base-isomorphisms,a n dbase-identity endomorphisms of Cbirat follows immediately
from the deﬁnitions. The portion of assertion (iv) concerning co-angular pre-steps
of C follows immediately from the deﬁnition of “Hom birat
C (−, −)”; Proposition 1.7,
(v) [for co-angular pre-steps].
To verify the portion of assertion (iv) concerning co-angular morphisms,w e
reason as follows: Given a morphism Abirat → Bbirat in Cbirat, any factorization

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 85
Abirat → Cbirat → Dbirat → Bbirat in Cbirat, where either Abirat → Cbirat or
Dbirat → Bbirat is a base-isomorphism, Cbirat → Dbirat is a(n) [isometric] pre-
step, and Dbirat → Bbirat is linear, arises [cf. the proof of assertion (i)] from a
factorization A′ → C′ → D′ → B in C, where either A′ → C′ or D′ → B is a
base-isomorphism, C′ → D′ is a pre-step, and D′ → B is linear. Thus, if A′ → B
is co-angular, then [by applying the factorization of Deﬁnition 1.3, (v), (b), to
C′ → D′, we conclude that] C′ → D′ is a co-angular pre-step, so Cbirat → Dbirat is
an isomorphism; in particular, it follows thatAbirat → Bbirat is co-angular.O nt h e
other hand, ifAbirat → Bbirat is co-angular, thenCbirat → Dbirat is an isomorphism,
which [by the portion of assertion (iv) concerning isomorphisms of Cbirat] implies
that C′ → D′ is a co-angular pre-step, hence an isomorphism whenever it is an
isometry [cf. Proposition 1.4, (iii)]; thus, A′ → B, hence also any morphismA → B
appearing in a factorization A′ → A → B [where A′ → A is a co-angular pre-step],
is co-angular.
The portion of assertion (iv) concerning morphisms of Frobenius type now
follows formally from the portion of assertion (iv) concerning co-angular morphisms,
isometries, and base-isomorphisms. Next, let us observe that it is immediate from
the deﬁnition of a pull-back morphism [cf. Deﬁnition 1.2, (ii)] that any pull-back
morphism of C maps to a pull-back morphism ofCbirat. Since, moreover, a morphism
of C is a co-angular linear morphism if and only if it is a composite of a co-angular
pre-step and a pull-back morphism [cf. Propositions 1.4, (iv); 1.7, (iii)], it thus
follows [cf. the portion of assertion (iv) concerning co-angular pre-steps of C]t h a t
every co-angular linear morphism of C maps to a pull-back morphism of Cbirat.
On the other hand, if φ : A → B is a morphism of C that maps to a pull-back
morphism φbirat : Abirat → Bbirat of Cbirat, then it follows that φ is linear, hence
that it factors as a composite γ ◦α,w h e r eα : A → C is a pre-step, and γ : C → B
is a pull-back morphism [cf. Proposition 1.7, (iii)]. Thus, we obtain an equation
φbirat = γbirat ◦αbirat in Cbirat,w h e r eφbirat, γbirat are pull-back morphisms, and
αbirat is a base-isomorphism; but [by the isomorphism of functors appearing in the
deﬁnition of a “pull-back morphism” in Deﬁnition 1.2, (ii)] this implies formally
that αbirat is an isomorphism, hence [by the portion of assertion (iv) concerning
co-angular pre-steps of C]t h a tα is a co-angular pre-step, as desired. Finally, the
portion of assertion (iv) concerning isotropic objects follows immediately from the
portion of assertion (iv) concerning pre-steps and co-angular pre-steps; Proposition
1.4, (i), (iii); Proposition 1.9, (iv). This completes the proof of assertion (iv).
In light of the “dictionary” provided by assertion (iv) [cf. also Proposition
1.4, (iv); the equivalence of categories of Proposition 1.9, (ii)], it is now a routine
exercise to check that C
birat is, in fact, a Frobenioid of group-like type.M o r e o v e r ,i t
is immediate from the deﬁnitions [and thetotal epimorphicity of C] that the functor
C→C birat is faithful and determines an injection O⊿(A)gp ↪→O ×(Abirat), for
A ∈ Ob(C). This completes the proof of assertion (ii). Now assertion (iii) follows
immediately from the existence of the functor Cbirat → FΦgp of assertion (i) [cf.
also Proposition 1.5, (ii)]; here, we note that the computation of the kernel of the
surjection of assertion (iii) follows from Deﬁnition 1.3, (vi). ⃝

86 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Deﬁnition 4.5.
(i) We shall say that an object of C is birationally Frobenius-normalized if
its image in Cbirat is Frobenius-normalized. [Thus, any birationally Frobenius-
normalized object of C is Frobenius-normalized — cf. Proposition 4.4, (ii), (iv).]
If every object of C is birationally Frobenius-normalized, then we shall say that C
is of birationally Frobenius-normalized type.I f C is of pre-model and birationally
Frobenius-normalized type, then we shall say that C is of model type.
(ii) Suppose that Φ is perf-factorial; A ∈ Ob(C). Then we shall say that A
is strictly rational if, for every prime p ∈ Prime(Φ(A)), there exists an element
a − b ∈ Φbirat(A), where a, b ∈ Φ(A) such that p ∈ Supp(a), p /∈ Supp(b)[ c f .
Deﬁnition 2.4, (i), (d)]. We shall say that A is rational if there exists a pull-back
morphism B → A in C,w h e r eB is strictly rational. If [Φ is perf-factorial, and]
every object of C is rational (respectively, strictly rational), then we shall say that
C is of rational (respectively, strictly rational) type.
(iii) We shall say thatC is of rationally standard typeif the following conditions
are satisﬁed: (a) C is of birationally Frobenius-normalized, rational, and standard
type; (b) (Cun-tr)birat admits a Frobenius-compact object.
(iv) We shall say that D is Div-slim [relative to Φ] if, for every A ∈ Ob(D),
the homomorphism
Aut(DA →D ) → Aut(DA → Mon)
[induced by composition with the functor Φ : D→ Mon]i s injective.[ T h u s ,i fD is
slim,t h e ni ti sD i v-slim.]
Remark 4.5.1. We observe in passing that it is immediate from the deﬁnitions
that if C is of rationally standard type (respectively, of standard type), then so is
Cistr.
Example 4.6. Frobenius-normalized vs. Birationally Frobenius-normal-
ized. As the following example shows, it is not necessarily the case that a Frobe-
nioid of Frobenius-normalized type is of birationally Frobenius-normalized type:
Let G be an abelian group, written additively. For each p ∈ Primes,l e tξp ∈ G.
Then if we write M
def
= G × Z × Z, then the assignment
M ∋ (g,a,b ) ↦→ (p · g + a · ξp,p · a, p· b) ∈ M
determines an endomorphism αp ∈ End(M) of the module M such that αp com-
mutes with all αp′ ,f o r p′ ∈ Primes. Thus, we obtain a homomorphism N≥1 →
End(M), i.e., an action ofN≥1 on M;w r i t eαn for the image in End(M)o fn ∈ N≥1.
Write N for the monoid whose underlying set is equal to the direct product
M × N≥1

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 87
and whose monoid structure is given as follows: If λ, μ ∈ M; l,m ∈ N≥1,t h e n
(λ, l) · (μ, m)=( λ + αl(μ),l · m). Now let D be a one-morphism category; Φ the
monoid on D whose unique value is given by Z≥0 × Z≥0.L e t C be the category
whose objects An are indexed by elementsn ∈ Z, and whose morphisms An1 → An2
[where n1,n2 ∈ Z] consist of elements ( g,a,b,d ) ∈ N such that a ≥ 0, b ≥ 0,
n2 −d·n1 = a+b; composition of morphisms is determined by the product structure
of N. The assignment (g,a,b,d ) ↦→ (a, b, d) then determines a functor
C→ FΦ
[which lies over D]. Moreover, one checks immediately that, relative to this last
functor, C is a Frobenioid of isotropic and standard typewhich is not of group-like
type. Also, we observe that the object A0 ∈ Ob(C)i s Frobenius-trivial,a n dt h a t
for every A ∈ Ob(C), O×(A)= O⊿(A)= G. On the other hand, one computes
easily that for Abirat ∈ Ob(Cbirat), O×(Abirat)= M0,w h e r ew ew r i t eM0 ⊆ M
for the subgroup of ( g,a,b ) ∈ M such that a + b = 0. Moreover, the morphisms
(0, 0, 0,d ) ∈ N determine a homomorphism N≥1 → EndC(A0) → EndCbirat (Abirat
0 )
[where we write use the superscript “birat” to denote the image of objects of C
in Cbirat], hence an action of N≥1 on O×(Abirat)= M0, which is easily veriﬁed
to coincide with the restriction to M0 of the original action of N≥1 on M.N o w
observe that C is of [strictly] rational type [cf. Deﬁnition 4.5, (ii)], and, moreover,
every object of (Cun-tr)birat is Frobenius-compact. On the other hand, if the ξp ̸=0
[so αp does not act on M0 by multiplication by p], then C fails to be of birationally
Frobenius-normalized type. [In a similar vein, we note that although Cbirat is “very
similar” to an elementary Frobenioid, the presence of the “ ξp’s” means that it is
not, in general, an elementary Frobenioid.]
Example 4.7. Frobenius-slim vs. Div-slim.
(i) Suppose that the functor Φ : D→ Mon maps every automorphism of D
to an identity automorphism of Mon. Then it follows formally that D is Div-slim
if and only if D is slim. In particular, if, for instance, D is a one-object category,
A ∈ Ob(D), and EndD(A)i sa nontrivial residually ﬁnite group G,t h e n
Aut(DA →D )=K e r ( A u t (DA →D ) → Aut(DA → Mon)) = G
— so [cf. Remark 3.1.2] D is Frobenius-slim, but not Div-slim.
(ii) Let V
def
= Q; N
def
=( N≥1)gp; G
def
= V ⋊ N,w h e r eN (⊆ Q)a c t so nV multi-
plicatively. Let D be a one-object category, A ∈ Ob(D); suppose that EndD(A)= G
[so Aut(DA →D )= G]. Then clearly there exists an injection F ↪→ G,s o D fails to
be Frobenius-slim. On the other hand, if Φ : D→ Mon is the functor determined
by the monoid ⨁
g∈G
Z≥0
[i.e., the copies ofZ≥0 are indexed by the elements ofG] equipped with theG-action
obtained by letting G act by left multiplication on the indices of the copies ofZ≥0,
then the natural map
Aut(DA →D )= G → Aut(DA → Mon)

88 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
is clearly injective,s o D is Div-slim [relative to Φ].
Proposition 4.8. (Birationalization of a Frobenioid II)
(i) If C is of isotropic type, then so is Cbirat.
(ii) If C is of perfect and isotropic type, then so is Cbirat.
(iii) If C is of rationally standard type, then (Cistr)birat is of standard
type.
(iv) If C is of isotropic and pre-model type, then so is Cbirat.
Proof. Assertion (i) follows formally from Proposition 4.4, (iv). To prove assertion
(ii), observe that the naive Frobenius functor [cf. Proposition 2.1] determines a
natural 1-commutative diagram [cf. Proposition 4.4, (ii), (iv)]
C
Ψ
−→ C
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
C
birat Ψ birat
−→ C birat
in which the vertical arrows are the natural functor C→C birat of Proposition 4.4,
(i); the horizontal arrows are the “naive Frobenius functor” of Proposition 2.1; the
upper horizontal arrow is an equivalence of categories [by our assumption that C
is of perfect type; Proposition 2.1, (iii)]. Since, moreover, Ψ and any quasi-inverse
to Ψ preserve [necessarily co-angular, since C is of isotropic type] pre-steps,i tt h u s
follows immediately [cf. the deﬁnition of “ Cbirat”] that Ψbirat is also an equivalence
of categories. But this implies [cf. Proposition 2.1, (iii)] that Cbirat is of perfect
type, as desired. In light of assertion (i), this completes the proof of assertion (ii).
Finally, assertion (iii) follows formally from the deﬁnitions [cf. also assertion (i)];
assertion (iv) follows formally Proposition 4.4, (iv) [cf. also assertion (i)]. ⃝
We are now ready to “reconstruct Φ category-theoretically fromC”.
Theorem 4.9. (Category-theoreticity of Divisor Monoids) For i =1 , 2,
let Φi be a divisorial monoid on a connected, totally epimorphic category Di;
Ci → FΦi a Frobenioid of rationally standard type;
Ψ: C1
∼
→C 2
an equivalence of categories. Then there exists an isomorphism of functors
ΨΦ :Φ 1
∼
→ Φ2
[where we regard, for i =1 , 2, the functor Φi : Di → Mon as a functor on Ci,
by restriction via the natural projection functor Ci →D i] lying over Ψ,w h i c hi s

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 89
compatible [when the Ci are of isotropic,b u t not of group-like type] with the
isomorphism ΨPrime of Theorem 4.2, (ii).
Proof. First, we observe [cf. Theorem 3.4, (i), (ii)] that we may assume without
loss of generality that C1, C2 are of isotropic type [cf. Remark 4.5.1], but not of
group-like type [since Theorem 4.9 is vacuous if C1, C2 are of group-like type].
Next, I claim that to complete the proof of Theorem 4.9, it suﬃces to show that
the right-hand and left-hand isomorphisms of Theorem 4.2, (iii), coincide [cf. Re-
mark 4.9.1 below], for all universally Div-Frobenius-trivial objects[e.g., Frobenius-
trivial objects — cf. Remark 1.11.1]. Indeed, if the right-hand and left-hand iso-
morphisms of Theorem 4.2, (iii), coincide for all universally Div-Frobenius-trivial
objects, then it follows immediately from the construction of the isomorphism
of functors ΨPrime in the proof of Theorem 4.2, (ii), that Ψ Prime extends, for
Ai ∈ Ob(Cbs-iso
i ), pi ∈ Prime(Φi(Ai)) [where i =1 , 2] such that A2 =Ψ ( A1),
p2 =Ψ Prime(p1), to an isomorphism of monoids
Φ1(A1)pf
p1
∼
→ Φ2(A2)pf
p2
which is functorial in A1 [regarded as an object of Cbs-iso
1 ]. Thus, by allowing the
pi to vary, we obtain, for Ai ∈ Ob(Cbs-iso
i )[ w h e r ei =1 , 2] such that A2 =Ψ (A1),
an isomorphism of monoids
Φ1(A1)pf
factor
∼
→ Φ2(A2)pf
factor
[cf. Deﬁnition 2.4, (i), (c)] which isfunctorial in A1 [regarded as an object ofCbs-iso
1 ].
Moreover, by applying, say, the ﬁrst equivalence of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii),
(d), to obtain pre-steps φ : A → B of Ci with arbitrary prescribed zero divisor and
considering primary steps ψ : A → C such that φ = ζ◦ψ for some pre-step ζ,o n e
concludes immediately that this subset maps the subset Φ1(A1) ⊆ Φ1(A1)pf
factor [cf.
Deﬁnition 2.4, (i), (c)] onto the subset Φ2(A2) ⊆ Φ2(A2)pf
factor, hence determines an
isomorphism of monoids
Φ1(A1)
∼
→ Φ2(A2)
which is functorial in A1 [regarded as an object of Cbs-iso
1 ]. Finally, the functoriality
of this isomorphism of monoids with respect to pull-back morphisms follows imme-
diately by “pulling back pre-steps”, as in Proposition 1.11, (v). This completes the
proof of the claim.
To prove that theright-hand and left-hand isomorphisms of Theorem 4.2, (iii),
coincide for all universally Div-Frobenius-trivial objects, we reason as follows. First
of all, by passing toperfections [cf. Theorem 3.4, (iii)], we may assume without loss
of generality that C1, C2 are of perfect type [cf. also Proposition 5.5, (iii), below].
Let A be a universally Div-Frobenius-trivial objectof Ci [where i =1 , 2]. Since the
right-hand and left-hand isomorphisms of Theorem 4.2, (iii), are clearly compatible
with pull-back morphisms [cf. Proposition 1.11, (v); the proof of Theorem 4.2, (iii)],
and Ψ preserves pull-back morphisms[cf. Theorem 3.4, (iii)], it follows that we may
assume without loss of generality that A is strictly rational. Let us refer to pairs

90 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
of primary steps β : A → B, γ : C → A such that Div(β)=( Φ i(γ))−1(Div(γ))
as twin-primary steps. Then, it suﬃces to show, for each p ∈ Prime(Φ1(A)), the
existence of twin-primary steps with zero divisor in p that are mapped by Ψ to
twin-primary steps of C2.
On the other hand, since A is strictly rational, it follows [cf. Deﬁnition 4.5,
(ii)] that there exist, for each p ∈ Prime(Φi(A)), cartesian commutative diagrams
of pre-steps as in Proposition 4.1, (iii),
C
γ′
−→ D
⏐⏐
↓
γ
⏐
⏐
↓
δ
B
β
−→ A
C
γ′
−→ D
⏐⏐
↓
γ′′
⏐
⏐
↓
δ′
A
α
−→ F
in which α, β are twin-primary with zero divisor inp; the pre-steps ζ
def
= β◦γ : C →
A, γ′′ : C → A are Div-equivalent [e.g., base-equivalent]. [Indeed, Deﬁnition 4.5,
(ii) [cf. also the equivalences of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d)], guarantees
the existence of base-equivalent pre-steps ζ, γ′′ — which may, moreover, be taken
to be co-primary [cf. Proposition 4.1, (iii); Deﬁnition 2.4, (i), (c), (d)], by our
assumption that Ci is of perfect type — such that ζ admits a factorization β ◦γ,
where β is primary with zero divisor that maps via Φ(β)−1 to an element of p,a n d
[again by our assumption thatCi is of perfect type] p is not contained in the support
of (Φ(ζ))−1(Div(γ)).] Conversely, given any pair of cartesian diagrams of pre-steps
as in Proposition 4.1, (iii),
C
γ′
−→ D
⏐⏐
↓
γ
⏐
⏐
↓
δ
B
β
−→ A
C
γ′
−→ D
⏐⏐
↓
γ′′
⏐
⏐
↓
δ′
A
α
−→ F
in which α, β are primary with zero divisor in p; the pre-steps ζ
def
= β ◦γ : C →
A, γ′′ : C → A are Div-equivalent [e.g., base-equivalent], it follows immediately
that α, β are twin-primary. On the other hand, since Ψ preserves pre-steps [cf.
Theorem 3.4, (ii)],primary steps [cf. Theorem 4.2, (i)], Div-equivalent pairs of base-
isomorphisms [cf. Theorem 4.2, (ii); the fact that Φi is non-dilating], and cartesian
diagrams as in Proposition 4.1, (iii) [cf. Proposition 4.1, (iii), or, alternatively,
Theorem 4.2, (ii)], we thus conclude that for each p ∈ Prime(Φ1(A)), there exist
twin-primary steps with zero divisor in p that are mapped by Ψ to twin-primary
steps of C2. This completes the proof of Theorem 4.9. ⃝
Remark 4.9.1. One veriﬁes immediately that the Frobenioid of Example 4.3 is
not of rational type.
Corollary 4.10. (Category-theoreticity of the Birationalization) For
i =1 , 2,l e tΦi be a divisorial monoid on a connected, totally epimorphic category
Di of FSMFF-type; Ci → FΦi a Frobenioid of quasi-isotropic type;
Ψ: C1
∼
→C 2

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 91
an equivalence of categories . Then there exists a 1-unique functor Ψbirat :
Cbirat
1 →C birat
2 that ﬁts into a 1-commutative diagram
C1
Ψ
−→ C 2
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
Cbirat
1
Ψ birat
−→ C birat
2
[where the vertical arrows are the natural functors of Proposition 4.4, (i); the hor-
izontal arrows are equivalences of categories]. Finally, if D1, D2 are slim,a n dC1,
C2 are of birationally Frobenius-normalized type, then each of the composite
functors of this diagram is rigid.
Proof. The existence and 1-uniqueness of a 1 -commutative diagram as in the
statement of Corollary 4.10 follows immediately from the deﬁnition of “ Cbirat
i ”[ c f .
Proposition 4.4, (i)], and the fact that Ψ preservesco-angular pre-steps[cf. Theorem
3.4, (ii)]. The rigidity assertion then follows immediately from Proposition 1.13, (i),
by considering base-identity endomorphisms of Frobenius type of Frobenius-trivial
objects of Ci, under the hypothesis that theCi are birationally Frobenius-normalized
[cf., e.g., the proof of the rigidity assertion of Theorem 3.4, (i)]. ⃝
Corollary 4.11. (Category-theoreticity of the Functor to an Elementary
Frobenioid I) For i =1 , 2,l e tΦi be a perf-factorial divisorial monoid on a
connected, totally epimorphic category Di which is Div-slim [with respect to Φi];
Ci → FΦi a Frobenioid of standard type;
Ψ: C1
∼
→C 2
an equivalence of categories.I f C1, C2 are of group-like type,t h e nw ea l s o
assume that bothΨ and some quasi-inverse toΨ preserve base-isomorphisms. Then:
(i) There exists a 1-unique functor Ψun-tr : Cun-tr
1 →C un-tr
2 that ﬁts into a
1-commutative diagram
Cistr
1
Ψ istr
−→ C istr
2
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
Cun-tr
1
Ψ un-tr
−→ C un-tr
2
[where the vertical arrows are the natural projection functors; the horizontal arrows
are equivalences of categories; Ψistr is the restriction of Ψ to Cistr
1 —c f .T h e o r e m
3.4, (i)]. Moreover, each of the composite functors of this diagram isrigid.
(ii) There exists a 1-unique functor ΨBase : D1 →D 2 that ﬁts into a 1-
commutative diagram
C1
Ψ
−→ C 2
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
D
1
Ψ Base
−→ D 2

92 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
[where the vertical arrows are the natural projection functors; the horizontal arrows
are equivalences of categories]. Moreover, if D1, D2 are slim, then each of the
composite functors of this diagram is rigid.
(iii) Suppose further that C1, C2 are of rationally standard type .T h e n
there exists an isomorphism of functors
ΨΦ :Φ 1
∼
→ Φ2
[where we regard, for i =1 , 2, the functor Φi : Di → Mon as a functor on Di]
lying over the equivalence of categories ΨBase of (i), which is compatible [when
the Ci are of isotropic,b u tnot of group-like type] with the isomorphismΨPrime of
Theorem 4.2, (ii). In particular,ΨBase, ΨΦ induce an equivalence of categories
Ψ F : FΦ1
∼
→ FΦ2 .
(iv) Suppose further thatC1, C2 are of rationally standard type. Then there
exists a 1-commutative diagram
C1
Ψ
−→ C 2
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
F
Φ1
Ψ F
−→ FΦ2
[where the vertical arrows are the functors that deﬁne the Frobenioid structures on
C1, C2; the horizontal arrows are equivalences of categories]. Moreover, each of the
composite functors of this diagram is rigid.
Proof. First, we observe [cf. Theorem 3.4, (i)] that we may assume without loss of
generality that C1, C2 are of isotropic type [cf. Remark 4.5.1]. Also, if C1, C2 are of
group-like type [cf. Theorem 3.4, (ii)], then “Div-slimness” amounts to “slimness”,
so assertions (i), (ii) follow from Theorem 3.4, (iv), (v); assertion (iii) is vacuous;
assertion (iv) follows from the fact that Ψ preserves Frobenius degrees [cf. Theorem
3.4, (iii), (iv)]. Thus, we may assume without loss of generality that C1, C2 are not
of group-like type.
Now we consider assertion (i). To show the existence and 1-uniqueness of a
1-commutative diagram as in the statement of assertion (i), it suﬃces to show that
Ψ preserves “ O
×(−)” [cf. the proof of Theorem 3.4, (iv)]. But observe that, for
A ∈ Ob(Ci), an element f ∈O ×(A) determines an automorphism [cf. the proof of
Proposition 3.3, (i)]
φf ∈ Aut((Cpl-bk
i )A →C i)
that maps to the identity in Aut(( Di)AD →D i)[ w h e r eAD
def
=B a s e (A)—c f .
the equivalence of categories (Cpl-bk
i )A
∼
→ (Di)AD of Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (c)], hence
also to the identity in Aut(( Di)AD → Mon) [i.e., via composition with Φ i]. Since
Di is Div-slim, it thus follows that the elements of O×(A) ⊆ AutCi (A)m a yb e
characterized as the automorphisms of A that arise from automorphisms
φ ∈ Aut((Cpl-bk
i )A →C i)

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 93
such that every automorphism [of an object of Ci] induced by φ is a Div-identity
automorphism. Thus, since Ψ preserves pull-back morphisms [cf. Theorem 3.4, (iii)]
and Div-identity automorphisms [cf. Theorem 4.2, (i); our assumption that the Φi
are perf-factorial], we thus conclude that Ψ preserves “ O×(−)”, as desired. This
completes the proof of the existence and 1-uniqueness of a 1-commutative diagram
as in the statement of assertion (i).
The rigidity assertion in the statement of assertion (i) follows by observing
that if α ∈ Aut(Ci →C un-tr
i ), then every automorphism [of an object of Cun-tr
i ]
induced by α is a Div -identity automorphism. [Indeed, this follows by applying
the functoriality of α to [co-angular] pre-steps, in light of the second equivalence of
categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d).] In particular, it follows that if A ∈ Ob(Ci),
AD
def
= Base(A), then the element
αA ∈ Aut((Cpl-bk
i )A →D i)
∼
→ Aut((Di)AD →D i)
determined by α maps [under composition with Φ i : Di → Mon]t ot h ei d e n t i t y
element of Aut((Di)AD → Mon). Thus, since Di is Div-slim, it follows that every
automorphism [of an object of Cun-tr
i ] induced by α is a base-identity automor-
phism, hence trivial [since Cun-tr
i is of unit-trivial type]. This completes the proof
of assertion (i).
Next, we consider assertion (ii). First, let us observe that we obtain a 1-
commutative diagram
C1
Ψ
−→ C 2
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
C
birat
1
Ψ birat
−→ C birat
2
[cf. Corollary 4.10]. Since, moreover, the base-isomorphisms of Cbirat
i are precisely
the morphisms of Cbirat
i which are abstractly equivalent to morphisms that arise
from base-isomorphisms of Ci [cf. Proposition 4.4, (iv)], it follows that Ψ birat pre-
serves base-isomorphisms, hence alsopull-back morphisms [cf. Proposition 1.7, (ii)].
Thus, since Di is Div-slim,t h ebase-identity endomorphisms of A ∈ Ob(Cbirat
i )m a y
be characterized as the endomorphisms of A that arise from endomorphisms
φ ∈ End((Cbirat
i )pl-bk
A →C birat
i )
such that every endomorphism [of an object of Cbirat
i ] induced by φ projects to an
automorphism of Di that is mapped by Φ i to an identity automorphism. Since,
by Theorem 4.2, (ii) [cf. also the fact that the Φ i are perf-factorial and non-
dilating], it follows immediately from the deﬁnition of Cbirat
i that Ψbirat preserves
those endomorphisms [of an object of Cbirat
i ] that project to an automorphism of
Di that is mapped by Φ i to an identity automorphism, we thus conclude that
Ψbirat preserves the base-identity endomorphisms [hence, in particular, that Ψ birat
preserves “ O×(−)”]. Thus, we obtain a 1-commutative diagram
Cbirat
1
Ψ birat
−→ C birat
2
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
(C
birat
1 )un-tr (Ψ birat)un-tr
−→ (Cbirat
2 )un-tr

94 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
[where the vertical arrows are the natural functors; the horizontal arrows are equiv-
alences of categories]. Since, moreover, the Frobenioids (Cbirat
i )un-tr are of isotropic,
unit-trivial,a n dgroup-like type, we thus conclude that we obtain a 1-commutative
diagram
(Cbirat
1 )un-tr (Ψ birat)un-tr
−→ (Cbirat
2 )un-tr
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
D
1
Ψ Base
−→ D 2
[cf. Proposition 3.11, (iii)]. Thus, by composing diagrams, we obtain a 1-commutative
diagram as in the statement of assertion (ii), which is easily veriﬁed to be 1-unique.
Finally, the rigidity assertion in the statement of assertion (ii) follows from Propo-
sition 1.13, (i). This completes the proof of assertion (ii).
Next, we observe that assertion (iii) follows formally from assertion (ii); Theo-
rem 4.9 [cf. also Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (a), (b); the technique of using the equivalence
of categories “D∗ ∼
→D ” applied in Proposition 2.2, (ii)]. Finally, we consider asser-
tion (iv). In light of the structure of an elementary Frobenioid [cf. Deﬁnition 1.1,
(iii)], the existence of a 1-commutative diagram as in the statement of assertion
(iv) now follows simply by concatenating assertions (ii), (iii), with the fact that Ψ
preserves Frobenius degrees[cf. Theorem 3.4, (iii)]. Finally, the rigidity assertion
follows via the same argument as was applied to prove the rigidity assertion that
appears in the statement of assertion (i). This completes the proof of assertion (iv).
⃝
Remark 4.11.1. Note that since “slim always implies Div-slim”, it follows that,
at least when the divisorial monoids involved areperf-factorial, Corollary 4.11, (ii),
constitutes a substantial strengthening of Theorem 3.4, (v).
Remark 4.11.2. Observe that in Example 3.9, since the subgroup U of G =
Aut(DA →D )[ w h e r eA ∈ Ob(D)] acts trivially on V × W, it follows that D fails
to be Div-slim,s ot h e non-preservation of units that occurs in this example does
not contradict Corollary 4.11, (i), (ii). In a similar vein, in Example 3.10, since
G =A u t (DA →D )[ w h e r eA ∈ Ob(D)] acts trivially on Z≥0, it follows that D fails
to be Div-slim,s ot h enon-preservation of base-identity endomorphismsthat occurs
in this example does not contradict Corollary 4.11, (ii).
Corollary 4.12. (Category-theoreticity of the Functor to an Elementary
Frobenioid II) For i =1 , 2,l e t Φi be a divisorial monoid on a connected,
totally epimorphic category Di which is Frobenius-slim; Ci → FΦi a Frobenioid
of rationally standard type; 0Di the monoid on Di that assigns to every object
of Di the monoid with one element;
Ψ: C1
∼
→C 2
an equivalence of categories.I f C1, C2 are of group-like type,t h e nw ea l s o
assume that bothΨ and some quasi-inverse toΨ preserve base-isomorphisms. Then

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 95
there exists a 1-unique functor Ψ0 : F0D1
→ F0D2
that ﬁts into a 1-commutative
diagram
C1
Ψ
−→ C 2
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
F0D1
Ψ 0
−→ F0D2
[where the vertical arrows are the natural projection functors, determined by the
Frobenius degree and the projection toDi [cf. Proposition 4.4, (i)]; the horizontal
arrows are equivalences of categories]. Moreover, if D1, D2 are slim, then each of
the composite functors of this diagram is rigid.
Proof. First, we observe [cf. Theorem 3.4, (i)] that we may assume without
loss of generality that C1, C2 are of isotropic type [cf. Remark 4.5.1]. Now the
natural projection functors Ci → F0Di
may be identiﬁed with the natural functors
Ci →C birat
i → (Cbirat
i )un-tr [cf. Proposition 3.11, (i)]. In particular, if C1, C2 are
of group-like type [cf. Theorem 3.4, (ii)], then [since Ci
∼
→C birat
i ] Corollary 4.12
follows from Theorem 3.4, (iv). Thus, we may assume without loss of generality
that C1, C2 are not of group-like type. Then Corollary 4.12 follows by applying
Corollary 4.10 to pass from Ci to Cbirat
i [where we note that, by Proposition 4.4,
(iv), and Theorem 3.4, (iii), it follows that the resulting equivalence of categories
Ψbirat preserves base-isomorphisms], followed by Theorem 3.4, (iv) [where we note
that, by Proposition 4.8, (iii), Cbirat
i is of standard type], which allows us to pass
from Cbirat
i to (Cbirat
i )un-tr, as desired. Finally, the rigidity assertion follows from
Proposition 1.13, (i). This completes the proof of Corollary 4.12. ⃝
Remark 4.12.1. One veriﬁes immediately that if one takes the groupG of Exam-
ple 3.10 to be residually ﬁnite , then the Frobenioid of Example 3.10 is ofrationally
standard and unit-trivial type [but not of group-like type] over a Frobenius-slim
base category [which is not Div-slim — cf. Remark 4.11.2]. In particular, one
may apply Corollary 4.12 to the self-equivalence of categories of Example 3.10. On
the other hand, since this self-equivalence fails to preserve base-identity endomor-
phisms of Frobenius type, it follows that it is not possible to replace the “ F0Di
”i n
the diagram of Corollary 4.12 by “ Di”.

96 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Section 5: Model Frobenioids
In the present §5, we study the extent to which an arbitrary Frobenioid of
isotropic type may be constructed explicitly as a “model Frobenioid”. This study of
“model Frobenioids” will be of use in the consideration of the concrete examples of
Frobenioids that we discuss in §6b e l o w .
In the following discussion, we maintain the notation of §1, §2, §3, §4. In
particular, we assume that we have been given adivisorial monoidΦ on a connected,
totally epimorphic category D and a Frobenioid C→ FΦ.
Theorem 5.1. (Divisorial Descriptions) Suppose that the Frobenioid C is
of isotropic type. Let A, A′ ∈ Ob(C) be Frobenius-trivial; AD
def
= Base( A) ∈
Ob(D); A′
D
def
= Base( A′) ∈ Ob(D); Disom ⊆D the subcategory determined by the
isomorphisms of D; Disom
D
def
=( Disom)D [for D ∈ Ob(D)=O b (Disom)]. Write
PicΦ(A)
def
=Φ gp(A)/Φbirat(A)
[cf. Proposition 4.4, (iii)] and PicC(A) for the set of isomorphism classes of C× D
Disom
AD [where the ﬁber product category is taken with respect to the natural functors
C→D , Disom
AD →D —c f . §0]. Then:
(i) The assignment that maps a pair of pre-steps
(φ : B → A, ψ: B → C)
to the object
(C, Base(φ) ◦Base(ψ)−1) ∈ Ob(C× D Disom
AD )
on the one hand and to the element
Φ(φ)−1(Div(ψ) − Div(φ)) ∈ Φgp(A)
on the other hand determines abijection PicΦ(A)
∼
→ PicC(A). Moreover, if (C,ζ :
CD
∼
→ AD) ∈ Ob(C× D Disom
AD ) [where C ∈ Ob(C), CD
def
= Base( C)] corresponds,
via this bijection, to an element γ ∈ PicΦ(A),a n dκ : C → C′ is a morphism of
Frobenius type,t h e n(C′,ζ ◦Base(κ)−1) ∈ Ob(C× D Disom
AD ) corresponds to the
element degFr(κ) · γ ∈ PicΦ(A).
(ii) If
(B,λ : BD
∼
→ AD) ∈ Ob(C× D Disom
AD ); ( B′,λ′ : B′
D
∼
→ A′
D) ∈ Ob(C× D Disom
A′
D
)
[where BD
def
= Base(B); B′
D
def
= Base(B′)], then there exists a morphism
φ : B → B′

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 97
in C of Frobenius degreed such that Base(φ)=( λ′)−1 ◦θ◦λ,w h e r eθ: AD → A′
D is
a morphism of D,a n dDiv(φ)= z ∈ Φ(B) if and only if the classes β ∈ PicΦ(A),
β′ ∈ PicΦ(A′) determined by B, B′, respectively, via the bijection of (i) satisfy the
following relation:
d · β + z|AD =( Φ (θ))(β′) ∈ PicΦ(A)
[where, by abuse of notation, we denote by z|AD the image of Φ(λ)−1(z) ∈ Φ(A) in
PicΦ(A)]. Moreover, if such a morphism exists, then its unit-equivalence class
[i.e., its image inCun-tr, or, equivalently,FΦ — cf. Proposition 3.3, (iv)] is unique.
(iii) The subcategory
CFr-tr ⊆C
determined by the Frobenius-trivial objects and isometric morphisms is a
Frobenioid of isotropic, group-like, base-trivial,a n d Aut-ample type. In
particular, the isomorphism class of a Frobenius-trivial object of C is completely
determined by the isomorphism class of its projection to D; all Frobenius-trivial
objects of C are Aut-ample.
(iv) Suppose that C is of unit-trivial type. Then any skeletal subcategory
P⊆ (CFr-tr)pl-bk determines a base-section of C; any base-section of C admits an
associated Frobenius-section F. Moreover, C is of model type.
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). Let us refer to a(n) [ordered] pair of pre-
steps as an A-pair if the ﬁrst pre-step has codomain A, and the second pre-step has
the same domain as the ﬁrst; let us say that two A-pairs (φ : B → A, ψ: B → C);
(φ′ : B′ → A, ψ: B′ → C′)a r eisomorphic if there exist isomorphismsιB : B
∼
→ B′,
ιC : C
∼
→ C′ such that φ′ ◦ιB = φ, ψ′ ◦ιB = ιC ◦ψ. Then observe that by the
equivalences of categories of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d), it follows that the assignment
(φ : B → A, ψ: B → C) ↦→ (Φ(φ)−1(Div(φ)), Φ(φ)−1(Div(ψ))) ∈ Φ(A) × Φ(A)
determines a bijection from the set of isomorphism classes of A-pairs onto Φ(A) ×
Φ(A); in particular, we obtain a map Φ(A) × Φ(A) → PicC(A). Moreover, relative
to this bijection, replacing an element ( x, y) ∈ Φ(A) × Φ(A)b ya ne l e m e n t(x +
z,y + z) ∈ Φ(A) × Φ(A)[ w h e r ez ∈ Φ(A)] corresponds to replacing (φ : B → A, ψ:
B → C)b y( φ ◦δ, ψ◦δ), for some pre-step δ; in particular, such replacements do
not aﬀect the element of PicC(A) determined by the A-pair.
Now I claim that the map Φ( A) × Φ(A) → PicC(A) of the above discussion
factors through PicΦ(A). Indeed, suppose that ( x, y) ∈ Φ(A) × Φ(A), (x′,y ′) ∈
Φ(A) × Φ(A) map to the same element of Pic Φ(A). Then, by the deﬁnition of
“Φ birat(A)” [cf. the statements and proofs of Proposition 4.4, (i), (iii)], it follows
that there exists a pair of base-equivalent pre-steps δ1,δ2 : D → A such that
Φ(δ1)−1(Div(δ1)) +x′ + y + z =Φ (δ2)−1(Div(δ2)) +x + y′ + z
for some z ∈ Φ(A) [cf. also the deﬁnition of “gp” in §0]; thus, by replacingδ1,δ2 by
the composite of δ1,δ2 with an appropriate pre-step [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d)],
we may assume that
Φ(δ1)−1(Div(δ1)) = x + y′ + z′;Φ ( δ2)−1(Div(δ2)) = x′ + y + z′

98 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
for some z′ ∈ Φ(A) [for instance, one natural choice for z′ is Φ(δ1)−1(Div(δ1)) +
x′ +y +z =Φ (δ2)−1(Div(δ2))+ x+y′ +z]; by replacing (x, y)b y( x+z′,y +z′)[ c f .
discussion of the the preceding paragraph], it follows that we may assume, without
loss of generality, that z′ = 0. Next, by applying the ﬁrst equivalence of categories
of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d), we observe that there exists a pre-step δ† : D → D†
such that Div(δ† )=Φ ( δi)(x + x′ + y + y′), where i =1 , 2 [and we note that Φ(δi)
is independent of i,s i n c eδ1, δ2 are base-equivalent]. Thus, [again by Deﬁnition 1.3,
(iii), (d)] we conclude that there exist base-equivalent pre-steps δA
1 ,δA
2 : A → D†
such that δ† = δA
2 ◦δ1 = δA
1 ◦δ2. In particular, we have Div( δA
1 )= x + y′,
Div(δA
2 )= x′ + y.
Let ϵ : E → A be a pre-step with Φ( ϵ)−1(Div(ϵ)) = x + x′ [cf. Deﬁnition
1.3, (iii), (d)]; ( φ : B → A, ψ : B → C)a n A-pair that corresponds to ( x, y);
(φ′ : B′ → A, ψ′ : B′ → C′)a n A-pair that corresponds to ( x′,y ′). Then since
x, x′ ≤ x + x′, it follows [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d)] that there exist factorizations
ϵ = φ ◦η, ϵ = φ′ ◦η′,w h e r eη : E → B, η′ : E → B′ are pre-steps. Moreover, by
applying the the second equivalence of categoriesof Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d), to D† ,
we conclude from the existence of thecompositesof ϵ : E → A with δA
1 ,δA
2 : A → D†
that there exists a pre-step ϵF : F → D† and a pair of base-equivalent pre-steps
δE
1 ,δE
2 : E → F such that the following relations hold:
ϵF ◦δE
1 = δA
1 ◦ϵ; ϵF ◦δE
2 = δA
2 ◦ϵ
Div(δE
1 )=( Φ (ϵ))(x + y′); Div( δE
2 )=( Φ (ϵ))(x′ + y)
[so Φ(ϵF )−1(Div(ϵF )) = Φ(δA
i )−1(x + x′), for i =1 , 2]. On the other hand, since
Div(ψ ◦η)=( Φ (ϵ))(x′ + y)=D i v (δE
2 ), Div(ψ′ ◦η′)=( Φ (ϵ))(x + y′)=D i v (δE
1 ),
we thus conclude [cf. Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d), applied to the pairs of pre-steps
(ψ ◦η: E → C,δE
2 : E → F)a n d(ψ′ ◦η′ : E → C′,δE
1 : E → F) emanating from E]
that there exists an isomorphismι: C
∼
→ C′ such that Base(ψ′ ◦η′) = Base(ι◦ψ◦η),
Base(ι◦ψ) ◦Base(φ)−1 = Base(ψ′) ◦Base(φ′)−1. That is to say, we have a [not
necessarily commutative!] diagram of pre-steps
E
η
−→ B
φ
−→ A
⏐⏐
↓
η′
⏐
⏐
↓
ι◦ψ
A
φ′
←− B′ ψ ′
−→ C′
whose projection to D is a commutative diagram of isomorphisms that is compat-
ible with identiﬁcation of the two copies of AD. In particular, we conclude that
(C, Base(φ) ◦Base(ψ)−1), (C′, Base(φ′) ◦Base(ψ′)−1) determine the same element
of PicC(A). This completes the proof of the claim.
Thus, we obtain a map Pic Φ(A) → PicC(A). It follows immediately from
Deﬁnition 1.3, (i), (b), that this map is a surjection. To show that this map is
injective, it suﬃces to consider ( x, y) ∈ Φ(A) × Φ(A), ( x′,y ′) ∈ Φ(A) × Φ(A)
that map to the same element of Pic C(A). Let ( φ : B → A, ψ : B → C)b e
an A-pair that corresponds to ( x, y); (φ′ : B′ → A, ψ : B′ → C)a n A-pair that

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 99
corresponds to (x′,y ′). By our assumption that (x, y)a n d(x′,y ′) map to the same
element of Pic C(A), it follows that we may assume that Base( φ′) ◦Base(ψ′)−1 =
Base(φ) ◦Base(ψ)−1. Thus, by applying Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii), (d), we obtain a [not
necessarily commutative!] diagram of pre-steps
E
η
−→ B
φ
−→ A
⏐⏐↓η′
⏐⏐↓ψ
A
φ′
←− B′ ψ ′
−→ C
such that φ ◦η = φ′ ◦η′, and whose projection to D is a commutative diagram
of isomorphisms that is compatible with identiﬁcation of the two copies of AD.
Thus, it follows that ψ ◦η,ψ′ ◦η′ : E → C are base-equivalent, hence determine
an element of Φbirat(C), which may be transported via ψ, φ [or, equivalently, ψ′,
φ′] to an element of Φbirat(A) ⊆ Φgp(A) which [cf. the discussion of the preceding
paragraph] is easily veriﬁed to be x+y′ −x′ −y ∈ Φgp(A). This completes the proof
of the injectivity, hence also of thebijectivity of the map PicΦ(A) → PicC(A). Also,
the portion of assertion (i) concerningmorphisms of Frobenius typefollows easily by
considering commutative diagrams as in Proposition 1.10, (i). This completes the
proof of assertion (i). Now assertion (ii) follows formally from assertion (i) [cf. also
Remark 1.1.1; the factorization of Deﬁnition 1.3, (iv), (a); the faithfulness portion
of Proposition 3.3, (iv)].
Next, we consider assertion (iii). First, let us observe that by assertion (i), any
isomorphism α
D : A′
D
∼
→ AD determines an object (A′,α) ∈ Ob(C× D Disom
AD )w h i c h
[in light of the fact that A′ is Frobenius-trivial, hence admits base-identity endo-
morphisms of Frobenius type of arbitrary prescribed Frobenius degree] corresponds
[via the bijection of assertion (i)] to an element ξ ∈ PicΦ(A) such that d · ξ = ξ,
for all d ∈ N≥1. Thus, taking d = 2 implies that ξ = 0, i.e., [cf. the deﬁnition of
PicC(A)] that there exists an isomorphism α : A′ ∼
→ A such that αD = Base(α). In
particular, we conclude that base-isomorphic Frobenius-trivial objects of C are, in
fact, isomorphic, and that all Frobenius-trivial objects ofC are Aut-ample. In light
of these observations, it follows immediately that CFr-tr satisﬁes the conditions of
Deﬁnition 1.3, i.e., that CFr-tr is a Frobenioid [of isotropic, group-like, base-trivial,
and Aut-ample type]. This completes the proof of assertion (iii).
Finally, we consider assertion (iv). First, we observe that since C is of unit-
trivial type, it follows immediately [cf., e.g., Proposition 3.3, (iii), (iv)] that given
any two objects A, B ∈ Ob(C), a pull-back morphism A → B (respectively, base-
identity endomorphism of Frobenius typeof A)i s uniquely determined by its projec-
tion to D (respectively, by its Frobenius degree). Moreover, by assertion (iii), it fol-
lows immediately that ifA, B ∈ Ob(CFr-tr), then any morphism Base(A) → Base(B)
[in D] lifts to a pull-back morphism of CFr-tr. Thus, we conclude that the natural
projection functor
(CFr-tr)pl-bk →D
is an equivalence of categories, hence that any skeletal subcategory P⊆ (CFr-tr)pl-bk
determines a base-section of C, and that any base-section of C admits an associated

100 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Frobenius-section. Moreover, since C is of unit-trivial type, it follows immediately
from the structure of an elementary Frobenioid[cf. the description of the kernel in
Proposition 4.4, (iii)] that C is of birationally Frobenius-normalizedtype, hence also
of model type, as desired. This completes the proof of assertion (iv). ⃝
The explicit descriptions of Theorem 5.1, (i), (ii), motivate the following con-
struction/result.
Theorem 5.2. (Model Frobenioids) Let Φ
 : D→ Mon be a divisorial
monoid on D; B : D→ Mon a group-like monoid on D; DivB : B → Φ
gp a
homomorphism of monoids on D. Denote the group-like monoid determined by
the image of DivB by Φ
birat ⊆ Φ
gp.T h e n :
(i) A well-deﬁned category C
 may be constructed in the following fashion.
The objects of C
 are pairs of the form
(AD,α)
where AD ∈ Ob(D), α ∈ Φ
(AD)gp;s e tBase(A)
def
= AD, Φ
(A)
def
=Φ
 (AD), B(A)
def
=
B(AD).A morphism
φ : A
def
=( AD,α) → B
def
=( BD,β)
[where AD,B D ∈ Ob(D), α ∈ Φ
(A)gp, β ∈ Φ
(B)gp] is deﬁned to be a collection
of data as follows: (a) an element degFr(φ) ∈ N≥1, which we shall refer to as the
Frobenius degree of φ; (b) a morphism Base(φ): AD → BD, which we shall
refer to as the projection to D to φ; (c) an element Div(φ) ∈ Φ
(A),w h i c hw e
shall refer to as the zero divisor of φ; (d) an element uφ ∈ B(A) whose image
DivB(uφ) ∈ Φ
(A)gp satisﬁes the relation
degFr(φ) · α +D i v (φ)=( Φ
 (Base(φ)))(β)+D i vB(uφ)
in Φ
(A)gp. The composite ψ ◦φ of two morphisms
φ =( d e gFr(φ), Base(φ), Div(φ),u φ): A → B
ψ =( d e gFr(ψ), Base(ψ), Div(ψ),u ψ ): B → C
is deﬁned as follows:
ψ ◦φ
def
=
(
degFr(ψ) · degFr(φ), Base(ψ) ◦Base(φ),
(Φ
(Base(φ)))(Div(ψ)) + degFr(ψ) · Div(φ), (B(Base(φ)))(uψ )+d e gFr(ψ) · uφ
)
[cf. Remark 1.1.1]. Moreover, the Frobenius degree, projection to D,a n dz e r o
divisor determine a functor C
 → FΦ
.

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 101
(ii) The category C
 is a Frobenioid [with respect to the functor C
 → FΦ
]o f
isotropic and model — hence, in particular, birationally Frobenius-normalized
— type. We shall refer to C
 as the model Frobenioid deﬁned by the divisor
monoid Φ
 and the rational function monoid B [which we regard as equipped
with the homomorphism DivB : B → Φ
gp]. Moreover, there is a natural isomor-
phism of functors between the functor “ O×(−)”o n D associated to the Frobenioid
C
birat [cf. Propositions 2.2, (ii), (iii); 4.4, (ii)] and the functorB; this isomorphism
is compatible with the homomorphisms O×(−) → Φ
gp [cf. Proposition 4.4, (iii)],
DivB : B → Φ
gp.
(iii) C
 is of standard type if and only if the following conditions are satisﬁed:
(a) if Φ
 is the zero monoid, then C
 admits a Frobenius-compact object; (b) D
is of FSMFF-type;( c )Φ
 is non-dilating. C
 is of rationally standard type if
and only if the following conditions are satisﬁed: (a) C
 is of rational and standard
type; (b) (C
un-tr)birat admits a Frobenius-compact object.
(iv) Suppose thatΦ=Φ
 ; B is the rational function monoidon D associated
to the Frobenioid C [cf. Proposition 4.4, (ii)]; DivB : B → Φ
gp is the natural
homomorphism O×(−) → Φgp =Φ
 gp [cf. Proposition 4.4, (iii)]; C is of model
type. Then there exists an equivalence of categories
C
∼
→C
that is 1-compatible with the functors C→ FΦ, C
 → FΦ
.
Proof. Assertions (i), (ii) follow via a routine veriﬁcation [which, in the case of
assertion (ii), is reminiscent of the veriﬁcation that “elementary Frobenioids are
Frobenioids” in Proposition 1.5, (i)]; in light of assertion (ii), assertion (iii) follows
formally from the deﬁnitions [cf. Deﬁnitions 3.1, (i); 4.5, (iii)]. Here, we observe
that the objects A =( A
D,α) such that α = 0 are Frobenius-trivial, and that these
objects, together with the morphisms φ =( d e gFr(φ), Base(φ), Div(φ),u φ): A → B
such that Div(φ)=0 , uφ = 1 [i.e., uφ is the identity element of B(A)], determine a
base-Frobenius pairof C
.
Finally, we consider assertion (iv). We may assume without loss of generality
that C, hence also CFr-tr,i sa skeleton.L e t( P, F)b ea base-Frobenius pairof C [cf.
our assumption that C is of model type]. Thus, P may be regarded as a subcategory
of CFr-tr.I f C ∈ Ob(C), then let us refer to a(n)[ordered] pair of pre-steps in C
(B → A, A → C)
such that A ∈ Ob(P)a sa n FP -path for C.W r i t e
C′
for the category C′ whose objects are objects of C equipped with an FP -path, and
whose morphisms are the morphisms between the objects regarded as objects of
C. Thus, we have a natural functor C′ →C [obtained by forgetting the FP -paths],

102 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
which is manifestly an equivalence of categories. Thus, it suﬃces to construct an
equivalence of categories C′ ∼
→C
 that is compatible with the functors C′ →C→ FΦ,
C
 → FΦ
.
Next, observe that we may apply Remark 2.7.2 toCFr-tr [which is ofbase-trivial
type, by Theorem 5.1, (iii)] to conclude that every morphism φ of CFr-tr admits a
unique factorization
φ = φP ◦φO× ◦φF
in CFr-tr,w h e r eφP is P-distinguished; φO× is a base-identity automorphism; φF is
F-distinguished.L e tu sw r i t e
E⊆C birat
for the full subcategory determined by the image of the objects inP. Then observe
that the category E is also a skeleton; that the Frobenioid E
∼
→C birat is also of
isotropic and base-trivial type [cf. Proposition 4.8, (i); Theorem 5.1, (iii)]; and that
(P, F) determine a base-Frobenius pairof E. Thus, we may apply Remark 2.7.2 to
E to conclude that every morphism ψ of E admits a unique factorization
ψ = ψP ◦ψO× ◦ψF
in E,w h e r eψP is P-distinguished; ψO× is a base-identity automorphism; ψF is
F-distinguished.
Now observe that to every object C ∈ Ob(C) equipped with an FP -path
(ζA : B → A, ζC : B → C), we may associate an object
(Base(A), Φ(ζA)−1(Div(ζC) − Div(ζA)) ∈ Φgp(A))
of C
 [cf. Theorem 5.1, (i)]. If C′ ∈ Ob(C) is equipped with an FP -path (ζA′ :
B′ → A′,ζC′ : B′ → C′), then we may associate to any morphism φ : C → C′ a
morphism
(
degFr(φ), Base(ζA′ ) ◦Base(ζC′ )−1 ◦Base(φ) ◦Base(ζC) ◦Base(ζA)−1 : A → A′,
(Φ(ζA)−1 ◦Φ(ζC))(Div(φ)) ∈ Φ(A),
{ζbirat
A′ ◦(ζbirat
C′ )−1 ◦φbirat ◦ζbirat
C ◦(ζbirat
A )−1}O× ∈O ×(Abirat)
)
[where the superscript “birat’s” denote the images of the respective objects and
morphisms of C in Cbirat]o f C
. Now in light of the fact that C is of model — hence,
in particular, birationally Frobenius-normalized— type, it is a routine exercise to
verify that these assignments determine a functor
C′ →C
that is compatible with the functors C′ →C→ FΦ, C
 → FΦ
. Indeed, this is
immediate for the ﬁrst three entries of the data that deﬁne a morphism ofC
; for the
ﬁnal entry, it follows from the existence of the unique factorizations of morphisms
of E discussed above. Note that these factorizations also imply that this functor

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 103
C′ →C
 is faithful. Moreover, this functor C′ →C
 is manifestly essentially surjective
[cf. Theorem 5.1, (i)] and full [cf. Theorem 5.1, (ii)], hence an equivalence of
categories, as desired. This completes the proof of assertion (iv). ⃝
Remark 5.2.1. It follows formally from Theorem 5.2, (ii), (iv), that the Frobe-
nioid “ C” of Example 4.6 constitutes an example of a Frobenioid ofisotropic, stan-
dard,a n d[strictly] rational type, which is not of group-like or model type.
Proposition 5.3. (Realiﬁcations of Frobenioids) Suppose that Φ is perf-
factorial. Then we shall refer to as the realiﬁcation
Crlf
of the Frobenioid C the model Frobenioid [cf. Theorem 5.2, (ii)] associated to
the divisor monoid
Φrlf
[i.e., the“realiﬁcation” of Deﬁnition 2.4, (i)] and therational function monoid
R ·Φbirat ⊆ (Φrlf)gp [i.e., for AD ∈ Ob(D), (R ·Φbirat)(AD) is the R-vector subspace
of (Φrlf)gp(AD) generated by Φbirat(AD)]. Moreover, the Frobenioid Cun-tr (respec-
tively, (Cun-tr)pf)i so f model type and may be obtained as the model Frobenioid
associated to the divisor monoid Φ (respectively, Φpf) and the rational function
monoid Φbirat (respectively, Q · Φbirat =Φ birat ⊗Z Q =( Φbirat)pf). In particular,
if C is of Frobenius-isotropic type, then there is a natural 1-commutative
diagram of functors
C− → C istr −→ C pf
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
C
un-tr −→ (Cun-tr)pf −→ C rlf
[where the functor C→C istr is the isotropiﬁcation functor of Proposition 1.9, (v);
the remaining functors are the functors that arise naturally from the construction
of the “unit-trivialization”, “perfection”, and “realiﬁcation”].
Proof. Since Frobenioids of unit-trivial type are always of model type [cf. The-
orem 5.1, (iv)], the various assertions in the statement of Proposition 5.3 follow
immediately from the deﬁnitions and Theorem 5.2, (ii), (iv). ⃝
Corollary 5.4. (Category-theoreticity of the Realiﬁcation) For i =1 , 2,
let Φi be a perf-factorial divisorial monoid on a connected, totally epimorphic
category Di which is Div-slim [with respect to Φi]; Ci → FΦi a Frobenioid of
rationally standard type;
Ψ: C1
∼
→C 2
an equivalence of categories.I f C1, C2 are of group-like type,t h e nw ea l s o
assume that bothΨ and some quasi-inverse toΨ preserve base-isomorphisms. Then

104 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
there exists a 1-unique functor Ψrlf : Crlf
1 →C rlf
2 that ﬁts into a 1-commutative
diagram
C1
Ψ
−→ C 2
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
Crlf
1
Ψ rlf
−→ C rlf
2
[where the vertical arrows are the natural functors of Proposition 5.3; the horizontal
arrows are equivalences of categories]. Moreover, each of the composite functors of
this diagram is rigid. Finally, the formation of Ψrlf from Ψ is 1-compatible
with the 1-commutative diagram of Proposition 5.3 [involving perfections, unit-
trivializations, etc.].
Proof. In light of the deﬁnition of the realiﬁcation [cf. Proposition 5.3], Corollary
5.4 follows immediately from Corollaries 4.10; 4.11, (iii), (iv). [Here, we note that
the rigidity assertion of Corollary 5.4 follows by a similar argument applied to prove
the rigidity assertion in Corollary 4.11, (i), (iv).] ⃝
Before continuing, we note the following [portions of which were in fact applied
in the proofs of Theorems 4.2, 4.9].
Proposition 5.5. (Perfection, Unit-trivialization and Realiﬁcation of
Types) Suppose that C is of Frobenius-isotropic and Frobenius-normalized
type. Then:
(i) If A ∈ Ob(Cistr) maps to an object Apf ∈ Ob(Cpf), then the natural functor
C→C pf determines a natural isomorphism O⊿(A)pf ∼
→O ⊿(Apf).
(ii) There is a natural equivalence of categories [compatible with the func-
tors to the respective elementary Frobenioids] between(Cpf)un-tr and (Cun-tr)pf and
between (Cpf)birat and (Cbirat)pf.
(iii) If C is of standard (respectively, rationally standard; model)t y p e ,
then so is Cpf. Moreover, Cun-tr, Crlf are always of model type. Finally, suppose
further that C is not of group-like type. Then if C is of standard (respectively,
rationally standard) type, then so are Cun-tr, Crlf.
(iv) If C is themodel Frobenioidassociated to dataΦ, B, DivB : B → Φgp [cf.
Theorem 5.2, (ii)], then there is a naturalequivalence of categories [compatible
with the functors to the respective elementary Frobenioids] betweenCpf (respectively,
Cun-tr; Crlf) and the model Frobenioid associated to the dataΦpf, Bpf, Bpf → (Φgp)pf
(respectively, Φ, Φbirat, Φbirat ↪→ Φgp; Φrlf, R · Φbirat, R · Φbirat ↪→ (Φrlf)gp).
Proof. Assertion (i) follows immediately for Frobenius-trivial A by considering
base-identity endomorphisms of Frobenius type of A and applying the hypothesis
that C is of Frobenius-normalized type; the case of arbitrary A then follows by con-
sidering “pairs of pre-steps” as in Theorem 5.1, (i) [cf. also Deﬁnition 1.3, (iii),

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 105
(c)]. Next, we consider assertion (ii). One checks immediately that [in light of our
hypothesis that C is of Frobenius-isotropictype] we may assume without loss of gen-
erality that C is of isotropic type. Then it follows immediately from the deﬁnition of
the perfection[cf. Deﬁnition 3.1, (iii)] that it suﬃces to obtain natural bijections be-
tween the respective sets of morphisms between the images of two given objects ofC
in (Cpf)un-tr,( Cun-tr)pf (respectively, (Cpf)birat), (Cbirat)pf). But this follows immedi-
ately from the deﬁnitions, together with Proposition 3.2, (ii), applied to “pre-steps”
and “units” [i.e., base-identity automorphisms]. Next, we consider assertion (iii).
First, we observe that Cun-tr, Crlf are of model type [cf. Theorem 5.1, (iv); Proposi-
tion 5.3; Theorem 5.2, (ii)], hence ofisotropic and birationally Frobenius-normalized
type [cf. Deﬁnitions 2.7, (iii); 4.5, (i)]. Next, let us observe that by assertion (ii), we
have natural equivalences ((Cun-tr)birat)pf ∼
→ ((Cpf)un-tr)birat,( Cbirat)pf ∼
→ (Cpf)birat;
moreover, since Cun-tr is of birationally Frobenius-normalized type, it follows that
(Cun-tr)birat is of Frobenius-normalized type, so assertion (i) may be applied to
(Cun-tr)birat. In light of these observations, assertion (iii) for Cpf follows immedi-
ately from the deﬁnitions [cf. also Proposition 3.2, (ii), (iii)] by observing thatCpf is
of isotropic type, and that by assertion (i), ifC∗ is C or (Cun-tr)birat [or Cbirat,w h e n
C is of birationally Frobenius-normalized type], and A ∈ Ob((C∗)istr), then O⊿(−)
of the image of A in (C∗)pf is the perfection of O⊿(A). Now suppose that C, hence
also Cun-tr, Crlf,a r enot of group-like type. Since ( Cun-tr)birat admits a Frobenius-
compact object, the same is true for (Crlf)birat. Also, we observe that the pull-back
morphisms of Cun-tr, Crlf are precisely the linear isometries [cf. Proposition 1.4,
(ii)]. In light of these observations, it follows immediately from the deﬁnitions that
if C is of standard (respectively, rationally standard) type, then so are Cun-tr, Crlf.
Finally, assertion (iv) is immediate from the deﬁnitions [cf. also assertions (i), (ii);
Proposition 5.3]. ⃝
Finally, we conclude the theory of the present §5 by discussing a certain issue
which is closely related to the issue of being of model type. Namely, instead of
working at the level of the entire category C,o r CFr-tr, we consider the issue of
being “of model type” at the level of a single Frobenius-trivial object:
Proposition 5.6. (Base-Sections of Frobenius-Trivial Objects) Suppose
that C is of model [hence, in particular,isotropic — cf. Deﬁnition 2.7, (iii)] and
unit-proﬁnite type. Let (P, F) be a base-Frobenius pair of C; A ∈ Ob(P) a
Frobenius-trivial object; AD
def
= Base(A). Then the pair
(
σ :A u tD(AD) ↪→ AutC(A),φ : N≥1 → EndC(A)
)
—w h e r eσ is a group homomorphism whose composite with the natural surjec-
tion AutC(A) ↠ AutD(AD) [cf. Theorem 5.1, (iii)] is the identity,a n dφ is a
homomorphism of monoids — determined by “restricting” P, F to A,i nf a c t ,de-
pends only on the data (C,A ), and, in particular, is independent of the data
(F, P) —u pt o conjugation [as a pair!] by an element of O×(A). We shall refer
to such a pair (σ, φ) as a base-Frobenius pair of A;w h e nF is regarded as being

106 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
known only up to composition with automorphisms of the monoid N≥1, we shall
refer to such a pair as a quasi-base-Frobenius pair of A.
Proof. Let
(
σ′ :A u tD(AD) ↪→ AutC(A),φ ′ : N≥1 → EndC(A)
)
be another such pair, that arises from a base-Frobenius pair (P′, F ′)o f C.W r i t e
E ⊆ EndC(A) for the submonoid of base-isomorphisms; φn
def
= φ(n) ∈ E, φ′
n
def
=
φ′(n) ∈ E,f o rn ∈ N≥1.T h e n Iclaim that it suﬃces to show the existence of a
u ∈O ×(A) ⊆ E such that
u · φp · u−1 = φ′
p
for all p ∈ Primes. Indeed, if, for α ∈ AutD(AD), we write σα
def
= σ(α), σ′
α
def
= σ′(α)
—s o σ′
α = vα · u · σα · u−1,f o rs o m evα ∈O ×(A) ⊆ E — then it follows from the
functoriality of F, F ′ that, for p ∈ Primes,
σα · φp = φp · σα; σ′
α · φ′
p = φ′
p · σ′
α
— hence [since C,b e i n go fmodel type,i sa l s oo f[birationally] Frobenius-normalized
type — cf. Deﬁnition 4.5, (i)] that
u · vα ·φp · σα · u−1 = vα · u · σα · φp · u−1 = vα · (u · σα · φp · u−1)
= vα · (u · σα · u−1) · (u · φp · u−1)= σ′
α · φ′
p = φ′
p · σ′
α
=( u · φp · u−1) · vα · (u · σα · u−1)=( u · vp
α · φp · u−1) · (u · σα · u−1)
= u · vp
α · φp · σα · u−1
— which [by the total epimorphicity of C] implies that vα = vp
α, for all p ∈ Primes.
Thus, by taking p = 2, we obtain that vα =1 . S i n c eφ, φ′ are homomorphisms,
and N≥1 is generated by Primes, this completes the proof of the claim.
To verify the existence of a u ∈O ×(A) as in the above claim, let us ﬁrst
observe that if M ⊆O ×(A) ⊆ E is any subgroup such that for any m ∈ M, f ∈ E,
there exists an m′ ∈ M such that f · m = m′ · f, then there is a natural monoid
structure on the set of cosets EM
def
= M \E = {M · f }f ∈E, together with a natural
surjection of monoids E ↠ EM .F o rp ∈ Primes,l e tu sw r i t e
Mp ⊆O ×(A)
for the closed subgroup topologically generated by the pro-l portions (O×(A))[l]
[cf. Deﬁnition 2.8, (ii)] of O×(A), as l ranges over the primes ̸= p. Note that
since the Frobenioid CFr-tr is of Aut-ample type [cf. Theorem 5.1, (iii)], it follows
that any f ∈ E admits a factorization f = f0 · f1,w h e r ef0 is an automorphism,
and f1 is a base-identity endomorphism. Thus, [by applying, again, the fact that
C,b e i n go fmodel type,i sa l s oo f [birationally] Frobenius-normalized type — cf.
Deﬁnition 4.5, (i)] it follows that “for any m ∈ Mp, there exists an m′ ∈ Mp such

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 107
that f ·m = m′ ·f”. In particular, it makes sense to speak of the monoidEMp .L e t
us use the symbol “
p
≈ ” to denote the equality of the images in Ep of elements of
E. Now since we have a natural isomorphism
∏
p∈Primes
O×(A)[p]
∼
→O ×(A)
[cf. Deﬁnition 2.8, (ii)], it thus follows that to prove the existence of a u ∈O ×(A)
as desired, it suﬃces to show, for eachp ∈ Primes, the existence of aup ∈O ×(A)[p]
such thatup ·φl ·u−1
p
p
≈ φ′
l, for alll ∈ Primes [i.e., we then takeu to be the “inﬁnite
product” of the up].
Now observe that for each l ∈ Primes, φ′
l
p
≈ vl · φl,f o rs o m evl ∈O ×(A)[p].
Since, for w ∈O ×(A)[p], we have, forl ∈ Primes, w ·φl ·w−1 p
≈ w1−l ·φl [where we
recall again thatC,b e i n go fmodel type,i sa l s oo f[birationally] Frobenius-normalized
type — cf. Deﬁnition 4.5, (i)], and O×(A)[p] is a [topologically ﬁnitely generated]
pro-p group, it follows that there exists aup ∈O ×(A)[p] such thatup ·φp ·u−1
p
p
≈ φ′
p,
as well as a wl ∈O ×(A)[p] such that wl · up · φl · u−1
p
p
≈ φ′
l,f o re a c hl ∈ Primes.
On the other hand, since φ, φ′ are homomorphisms, it follows that
φl1 · φl2
p
≈ φl2 · φl1 ; φ′
l1 · φ′
l2
p
≈ φ′
l2 · φ′
l1
[for l1,l2 ∈ Primes]. Thus, for l ∈ Primes,w eh a v e
wl · up·φp · φl · u−1
p
p
≈ wl · up · φl · φp · u−1
p
p
≈ wl · up · φl · u−1
p · up · φp · u−1
p
p
≈ φ′
l · φ′
p
p
≈ φ′
p · φ′
l
p
≈ up · φp · u−1
p · wl · up · φl · u−1
p
p
≈ up · wp
l · φp · u−1
p · up · φl · u−1
p
p
≈ wp
l · up · φp · φl · u−1
p
— which [by the total epimorphicity of C] implies thatwl
p
≈ wp
l [for all l ∈ Primes].
Since O×(A)[p] is a [topologically ﬁnitely generated] pro-p group, we thus conclude
that wl
p
≈ 1. This completes the proof of the existence of a u ∈O ×(A) as desired,
and hence of Proposition 5.6. ⃝
Remark 5.6.1. The notion of a “base-section of a Frobenius-trivial object”[i.e.,
in the notation of Proposition 5.6, a section “ σ”] is intended to be an abstract
category-theoretic translationof the notion of a“tautological section of a trivial line
bundle” [cf. Remark 2.7.1; the Frobenioids of Examples 6.1, 6.3 below].
Corollary 5.7. (Category-theoreticity of Base-Sections) For i =1 , 2,
let Φi be a perf-factorial divisorial monoid on a connected, totally epimorphic
category Di which is Div-slim [with respect to Φi]; Ci → FΦi a Frobenioid of
standard type;
Ψ: C1
∼
→C 2

108 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
an equivalence of categories.I f C1, C2 are of group-like type,t h e nw ea l s o
assume that both Ψ and some quasi-inverse to Ψ preserve base-isomorphisms.
Then:
(i) Ψ maps base-sections (respectively,quasi-base-Frobenius pairs)o f C1
to base-sections (respectively, quasi-base-Frobenius pairs) ofC2.I np a r t i c u l a r ,C1 is
of model type if and only if C2 is.
(ii) C1 is of unit-proﬁnite type if and only if C2 is.
(iii) Suppose that C1, C2 are ofmodel and unit-proﬁnite type. Then Ψ maps
every quasi-base-Frobenius pair of a Frobenius-trivial object A1 ∈ Ob(C1) to a
quasi-base-Frobenius pair of a Frobenius-trivial objectA2 ∈ Ob(C2).
(iv) Suppose, moreover, whenC1, C2 are of group-like type, that both Ψ and
some quasi-inverse to Ψ preserve Frobenius degrees. Then the preﬁx “quasi-”
may be removed from the statements of (i), (iii).
Proof. Indeed, sorting through the deﬁnitions, to verify assertions (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
it suﬃces to show that Ψ preserves isotropic objects, prime-Frobenius morphisms,
pull-back morphisms, birationalizations, the natural projection functor Ci →D i
[hence, in particular, the units “ O×(−)”], and [in the case of the ﬁnal portion of
assertion (iv), when C1, C2 are not of group-like type] Frobenius degrees. But this
follows from Theorem 3.4, (i), (iii); Corollary 4.10; Corollary 4.11, (ii) [cf. also
Remark 3.4.1]. This completes the proof of Corollary 5.7. ⃝

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 109
Section 6: Some Motivating Examples
In the present §6, we discuss some of the principal motivating examples from
arithmetic geometry of the theory of Frobenioids. In particular, in the case of
number ﬁelds, one of these examples provides an interesting “category-theoretic
interpretation”of some results of classical number theory, such as theDirichlet unit
theorem and Tchebotarev’s density theorem, as well as a result in transcendence
theory due to Lang [cf. Theorem 6.4, (i), (iii), (iv)].
Example 6.1. A Frobenioid of Geometric Origin. Let V be a proper
normal [geometrically integral] variety over a ﬁeld k; K the function ﬁeld of V ;
˜K/K a [possibly inﬁnite] Galois extension; G
def
= Gal( ˜K/K); DK a set of Q-Cartier
prime divisorson V . The connected objects of the Galois categoryB(G)[ c f .§0] may
be thought of as schemes Spec(L), where L ⊆ ˜K is a ﬁnite [necessarily separable]
extension of K.I f w e w r i t eV [L] for the normalization of V in L [so V [L]i sa l s o
a proper normal variety], then let us write DL for the set of prime divisors of V [L]
that map into [possibly subvarieties of codimension ≥ 1 of] prime divisors of DK.
If for every Spec(L) ∈ Ob(B(G)0)[ c f .§0], every prime divisor of DL is Q-Cartier,
then we shall say that DK is ˜K-Q-Cartier. In the following, we shall assume that
DK is ˜K-Q-Cartier. If L ⊆ ˜K is a ﬁnite extension, then let us write
Φ(L) ⊆ Z≥0[DL] ⊆ Z[DL]
for the monoid of Cartier eﬀective divisors D on V [L] with support in DL [i.e., D
such that every prime divisor in the support of D belongs to DL]a n d
B(L) ⊆ L×
for the group of rational functionsf on V [L] such that every prime divisor at which
f has a zero or a pole belongs to DL. Observe that Φ( L)gp ⊆ Z[DL]m a yb e
identiﬁed with the group of Cartier divisors on V [L], and that
Φ(L)pf = Q≥0[DL] ⊆ Q[DL]=( Φ (L)pf)gp
[since DK is ˜K-Q-Cartier]; moreover, one veriﬁes immediately that Φ( L)i s perf-
factorial, that there is anatural bijectionPrime(Φ(L))
∼
→ DL, and that the supports
of elements of Φ(L) are precisely theﬁnite subsets of DL. By assigning to a rational
function f the divisor obtained by subtracting the divisor of poles of f from the
divisor of zeroes of f, we obtain a natural homomorphism
B(L) → Φ(L)gp
which is functorial in L. In particular, the assignments L ↦→ Φ(L), L ↦→ B(L)
determine, respectively, a perf-factorial divisorial monoid Φo n D
def
= B(G)0 and
a group-like monoid B on D, equipped with a homomorphism [of monoids on D]
B → Φgp. Thus, by Theorem 5.2, (ii), this data determines a [model] Frobenioid
CV,
/CT
K,DK

110 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
of isotropic and birationally Frobenius-normalized type. Note that an object of
CV,
/CT
K,DK
that projects to Spec(L) ∈ Ob(B(G)0) may be thought of as a line bundle
L on V [L] that is representable by a Cartier divisor D with support in DL.I f L is
such a line bundle on V [L], and M is such a line bundle on V [M][ w h e r eM ⊆ ˜K
is a ﬁnite extension of K], then one veriﬁes immediately that a morphism L→M
in CV,
/CT
K,DK
may be thought of as consisting of the following data: (a) a morphism
Spec(L) → Spec(M)o v e rS p e c (K) [which thus induces a morphism V [L] → V [M]
over V ]; (b) an element d ∈ N≥1; (c) a morphism of line bundles L⊗d →M | V [L]
on V [L] whose zero locus is a Cartier divisor supported in DL. Also, we observe
that [since V [L]i sa proper normal variety]f o rA ∈ Ob(CV,
/CT
K,DK
) that projects to
Spec(L) ∈ Ob(B(G)0), we have
O×(A)= O⊿(A)= k×
L
where kL denotes the algebraic closure ofk in L [so kL is a ﬁnite separable extension
of k].
Theorem 6.2. (Geometric Frobenioids) For i =1 , 2,l e tVi be a proper
normal [geometrically integral]varietyover a ﬁeld ki; Ki the function ﬁeld of Vi;
˜Ki/Ki a [possibly inﬁnite] Galois extension; Gi
def
= Gal( ˜Ki/Ki); Di
def
= B(Gi)0;
DKi ̸= ∅ a ˜Ki-Q-Cartier set of prime divisors on Vi.F o r Spec(Li) ∈ Ob(Di),
write Vi[Li] for the normalization of Vi in Li; DLi for the set of prime divisors
of Vi[Li] that map into [possibly subvarieties of codimension≥ 1 of] prime divisors
of DKi ;
Φi(Li) ⊆ Z≥0[DLi ] ⊆ Z[DLi ]
for the monoid of Cartier eﬀective divisors on Vi[Li] with support in DLi ;
Bi(Li) ⊆ L×
i
for thegroup of rational functionson Vi[Li] whose zeroes and poles are supported
on DLi ; Bi(Li) → Φi(Li)gp for the natural map;
Ci
for the associated model Frobenioid of Theorem 5.2, (ii). Then:
(i) Let
ψ : V2 → V1
be a dominant morphism of schemes such that the following conditions are sat-
isﬁed: (a) DK2 is equal to the set of prime divisors of V2 that map into a prime
divisor of DK1 ; (b) the resulting inclusion of function ﬁelds K1 ↪→ K2 satisﬁes the
condition that the composite inclusionK1 ↪→ K2 ↪→ ˜K2 factors through ˜K1;( c )K1
is separably closed in K2.T h e nψ induces a functor
Ψ: C1 →C 2

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 111
[well-deﬁned up to isomorphism] that is compatible with Frobenius degrees, the
functor D1 →D 2 induced by the inclusion of ﬁelds K1 ↪→ K2, and the natural
transformations Φ1 → Φ2|D1 , B1 → B2|D1 induced by pulling back divisors and
rational functions, respectively, viaψ.
(ii) Assume that the data labeled by the index “1”i sequal to the data labeled
by the index “ 2” [so in the following, we shall omit these indices]. Also, let us
suppose that k is of positive characteristic p. Then the Frobenius morphism
ψ : V → V satisﬁes the conditions of (i), hence determines a functor
Ψ: C→C
which is isomorphic to the naive Frobenius functor [of degree p on C]o fP r o p o -
sition 2.1.
(iii) We maintain the assumption of (ii) concerning indices. Then the Frobe-
nioid C is of isotropic, standard,a n d birationally Frobenius-normalized
type, but not of group-like type. If, moreover, for every ﬁnite extension L ⊆ ˜K of
K, and every D ∈ DL, it holds that D lies in the support of the image in Φ(L)gp
of an element of B(L),t h e nC is of rationally standard type.
(iv) We maintain the assumption of (ii) concerning indices. ThenD is Frobe-
nius-slim.L e t Z ⊆ G be the subgroup of elements that commute with some open
subgroup of G.T h e nD is slim if and only if Z = {1}; D is Div-slim [relative to
Φ] if and only if, for every 1 ̸= z ∈ Z, there exists a ﬁnite Galois extension L ⊆ ˜K
of K such that z acts nontrivially on Φ(L).
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). Note that by assumptions (b), (c) [in
the statement of assertion (i)], it follows that any ﬁnite extension L1 ⊆ ˜K1 of K1
determines a ﬁnite extension L2
def
= L1 · K2 ⊆ ˜K2 of K2 such that [L2 : K2]=[ L1 :
K1]. Thus, ψ determines a functor D1 →D 2. Moreover, by assumption (a) [in
the statement of assertion (i)], it follows that by pulling back [Cartier] divisors and
rational functions viaψ, we obtaincompatible natural transformationsΦ1 → Φ2|D1 ,
B1 → B2|D1 . Thus, it follows formally from the deﬁnition of the category underlying
a model Frobenioid in Theorem 5.2, (i), that we obtain a functor Ψ : C1 →C 2
satisfying the properties stated in assertion (i). From this deﬁnition of the functor
Ψ, it then follows immediately from the deﬁnition of the “Frobenius morphism in
characteristic p”, together with the deﬁnition of the “naive Frobenius functor” of
Proposition 2.1 — i.e., in a word, that both functors are obtained by“raising to the
p-th power”— that these two functors are isomorphic. This completes the proof of
assertions (i), (ii).
Next, we consider assertion (iii). The fact thatC is of isotropic and birationally
Frobenius-normalizedtype follows formally from Theorem 5.2, (ii). The fact that C
is not of group-like type is immediate from our assumption that D
K ̸= ∅[and the
deﬁnition of Φ]. It is immediate that every monomorphism of D is an isomorphism,
hence that D is of FSM-type [hence also of FSMFF-type —c f . §0]. If a K-linear
automorphism α of a ﬁnite extension L ⊆ ˜K of K induces an automorphism of Φ(L)

112 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
which preserves the primes of L, then it is immediate from the fact that α induces
an automorphism of the schemeV [L]t h a tα maps every prime divisorD ∈ Φ(L)t o
D [i.e., not to some n · D,w h e r en ≥ 2]; thus, we conclude that Φ is non-dilating,
hence that C is of standard type. Now suppose that for every ﬁnite extensionL ⊆ ˜K
of K, and every D ∈ DL, it holds that D lies in the support of the image in Φ(L)gp
of an element of B(L). Then it follows formally [cf. Deﬁnition 4.5, (ii)] that C is of
[strictly] rational type [since Φ has already been observed to beperf-factorial —c f .
Example 6.1]. Thus, C satisﬁes condition (a) of Deﬁnition 4.5, (iii). Now I claim
that every object of ( Cun-tr)birat is Frobenius-compact. Indeed, if α is a K-linear
automorphism of a ﬁnite extension L ⊆ ˜K of K that acts by multiplication by
λ ∈ Q>0 on Φbirat(L)pf (̸= 0), then since α induces an automorphism of the variety
V [L], it follows that the order ∈ Q>0 of the zero [or pole] of highest order of an
element f ∈ Φbirat(L)pf is preserved by α, hence that λ = 1. This completes the
proof of the claim, and hence of the fact that C is of rationally standard type.
Finally, we consider assertion (iv). First, we observe that if L ⊆ ˜K is a ﬁnite
extension of K that corresponds to an open subgroup H ⊆ G, then there is a
natural isomorphism
(Z ⊇) ZG(H)
∼
→ Aut(DSpec(L) →D )
[cf. [Mzk7], Corollary 1.1.6]. Since G is proﬁnite, hence, in particular, residually
ﬁnite , it follows formally that Z, ZG(H) are also residually ﬁnite, hence that D is
Frobenius-slim, by Remark 3.1.2. Also, since Z is the union of subgroups of G of
the form “ ZG(H)”, it follows formally that D is slim if and only if Z = {1},a n d
that D is Div-slim [relative to Φ] if and only if, for every 1 ̸= z ∈ Z, there exists
a ﬁnite Galois extension L′ ⊆ ˜K of K such that z acts nontrivially on Φ(L′). This
completes the proof of assertion (iv). ⃝
Remark 6.2.1. Theorem 6.2, (ii), constitutes the principal justiﬁcation for the
name “Frobenius functor” that was applied to various functors in §2. From this
point of view, the decomposition of the naive Frobenius functor of Proposition 2.1
into “unit-linear” and “unit-wise” Frobenius functors [cf. the proof of Corollary
2.6] may be thought of as corresponding to the decomposition of the Frobenius
morphism in positive characteristic algebraic geometry over a ﬁxed base into the
composite of a “relative Frobenius morphism”, which is linear over the ﬁxed base,
with the Frobenius morphism of the ﬁxed base.
Example 6.3. A Frobenioid of Arithmetic Origin. Let F be a number
ﬁeld [cf. §0]. Write V(F) for the set of valuations on F [where we identify com-
plex archimedean valuations with their complex conjugates]; OF for the ring of
integers of F.I f v ∈ V(F), then we shall write Fv for the completion of F at v;
O×
v ⊆ F ×
v for the group of units [i.e., elements of valuation 1 of F ×
v ]; O⊿
v ⊆ F ×
v
for the multiplicative monoid of elements of valuation ≤ 1; μ (F) ⊆O ×
F for the
group of roots of unity in F;o r d (Fv)
def
= F ×
v /O×
v ;o r d (O⊿
v )
def
= O⊿
v /O×
v ⊆ ord(Fv).
Thus, ord(Fv)=o r d (O⊿
v )gp;o r d (Fv) ∼= Z,o r d (O⊿
v ) ∼= Z≥0 if v is nonarchimedean;

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 113
ord(Fv) ∼= R,o r d (O⊿
v ) ∼= R≥0 if v is archimedean. We shall refer to an element of
the monoid
Φ(F)
def
=
⨁
v∈V(F)
ord(O⊿
v )
as an eﬀective arithmetic divisor on F, and to an element of the group
Φ(F)gp =
⨁
v∈V(F)
ord(Fv)
as an arithmetic divisor on F. Thus, there is a natural homomorphism of groups
B(F)
def
= F × → Φ(F)gp
[given by mapping an element f ∈ F × to the images of f in the various factors
F ×
v /O×
v =o r d (Fv), all but a ﬁnite number of which are zero]. Note, moreover, that
Φ, B, as well as the homomorphism B → Φgp are functorial in the number ﬁeld
F.T h u s , i f˜F is a [not necessarily ﬁnite] Galois extension of F, G
def
= Gal( ˜F/F ),
D
def
= B(G)0,t h e nΦ ,B determine monoids on D, and we have a natural homo-
morphism B → Φgp. Moreover, for each ﬁnite extension L ⊆ ˜F of F,o n ev e r i -
ﬁes immediately that Φ( L) ̸=0i s perf-factorial, that there is a natural bijection
Prime(Φ(L))
∼
→ V(L), and that the supports of elements of Φ(L) are precisely the
ﬁnite subsets of V(L). Thus, by Theorem 5.2, (ii), this data determines a [model]
Frobenioid
C
/CT
F/ F
of isotropic and birationally Frobenius-normalized type. Note that an object of
C
/CT
F/ F that projects to Spec( L) ∈ Ob(B(G)0) may be thought of as an arithmetic
line bundle L on L [i.e., a line bundle on Spec(OL), equipped with Hermitian metrics
at the archimedean primes — cf. [Szp], pp. 13-14]. If L is an arithmetic line bundle
on L,a n dM is an arithmetic line bundle onM [where M ⊆ ˜F is a ﬁnite extension
of F], then one veriﬁes immediately that a morphism L→M in C
/CT
F/F may be
thought of as consisting of the following data: (a) a morphism Spec(L) → Spec(M)
over Spec(F); (b) an element d ∈ N≥1; (c) a nonzero morphism of arithmetic line
bundles L⊗d →M | L on L. Also, we observe that for A ∈ Ob(C
/CT
F/ F) that projects
to Spec(L) ∈ Ob(B(G)0), we have
O×(A)= O⊿(A)= μ (L)
[cf., for instance, [Szp], p. 15]. Also, observe that we have a natural arithmetic
degree homomorphism
degarith
L :Φ (L)gp → R
obtained as follows: If v is archimedean, so we have a natural embedding of topo-
logical ﬁelds R ↪→ Fv, then the restriction of deg arith
L to the factor ord( Fv) maps
the image of λ ∈ R>0 to −[Fv : R] · log(λ). If v is nonarchimedean, then the re-
striction of degarith
L to the factor ord(Fv) maps the image of an element λ ∈O ⊿
v to

114 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
the natural logarithm of the cardinality of the ﬁnite set Ov/(λ)[ w h e r eOv is the
ring of integers of Fv]. Thus, one veriﬁes immediately that degarith
L vanishes on the
image of B(L).
Remark 6.3.1. In light of Examples 6.1, 6.3, many readers might expect that the
next natural step is to attempt to apply the theory of Frobenioids to study arith-
metic line bundles onhigher-dimensional arithmetic varieties. This leads, however,
to numerous complications which are beyond the scope of the present paper. More-
over, it is not even clear to the author at the time of writing that this constitutes
a natural direction in which to further develop the theory of Frobenioids.
Theorem 6.4. (Arithmetic Frobenioids) For i =1 , 2,l e tFi be a number
ﬁeld ; ˜Fi/Fi a [possibly inﬁnite] Galois extension ; Gi
def
= Gal( ˜Fi/Fi); Di
def
=
B(Gi)0; Φi the monoid on Di given by the eﬀective arithmetic divisors; Bi the
group-like monoid on Di given by the multiplicative group of the ﬁeld extension
of Fi in question; Bi → Φgp
i the natural map;
Ci
the associated model Frobenioid of Theorem 5.2, (ii). Then:
(i) Assume that the data labeled by the index “ 1”i sequal to the data labeled
by the index “ 2” [so in the remainder of the present assertion (i), we shall omit
these indices]. Then the Frobenioids C, Cpf, Crlf, Cun-tr, (Cpf)un-tr are of isotropic
and rationally standard type, but not of group-like type; D is Frobenius-slim
and Div-slim [with respect to Φ, Φpf, Φrlf]. Moreover, D is slim if and only if the
subgroup of elements of G that commute with some open subgroup of G is trivial.
Finally, if A ∈ Ob(Crlf) is a Frobenius-trivial object that projects to the object
of D determined by a ﬁnite extension L ⊆ ˜F of F,t h e ndegarith
L determines an
isomorphism of groups
δA :P i cΦ(A)
∼
→ R
[cf. Theorem 5.1, (i)].
(ii) Let
Ψrlf : Crlf
1
∼
→C rlf
2
be an equivalence of categories between the realiﬁcations [cf. Proposition
5.3] of C1, C2. Then there exists an element deg(Ψrlf) ∈ R>0 such that for all
Frobenius-trivial A1 ∈ Ob(C1), A2 ∈ Ob(C2) such that A2 =Ψ rlf(A1) [where we
recall that Ψrlf preserves Frobenius-trivial objects — cf. (i); Corollary 4.11, (iv)],
the composite of δA2 with the isomorphism PicΦ(A1)
∼
→ PicΦ(A2) determined by
Ψrlf [cf. (i) above; Corollary 4.10; Corollary 4.11, (iii)] is equal to deg(Ψrlf) · δA1 .
(iii) If the equivalence of categoriesΨrlf of (ii) arises from anequivalence of
categories
(Ψpf)un-tr :( Cpf
1 )un-tr ∼
→ (Cpf
2 )un-tr

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 115
between the unit-trivialized perfections of C1, C2 [cf. (i); Corollary 5.4], then
deg(Ψrlf) ∈ Q>0. In particular, if A1 ∈ Ob((Cpf
1 )un-tr) [whose projection to D1 we
denote by Spec(L1)], A2 ∈ Ob((Cpf
2 )un-tr) [whose projection to D2 we denote by
Spec(L2)], A2 =( Ψpf)un-tr(A1), then the bijection
V(L1)
∼
→ Prime(Φ1(L1))
∼
→ Prime(Φ2(L2))
∼
→ V(L2)
induced by (Ψpf)un-tr [cf. (i); Corollary 4.11, (iii)] maps a valuation v1 ∈ V(L1)
lying over a valuation v0 of Q to a valuation v2 ∈ V(L2) lying over the valuation
v0 of Q.
(iv) If the equivalence of categoriesΨrlf of (ii) arises from an equivalence of
categories
Ψ: C1
∼
→C 2
between C1, C2 [cf. (i); (iii); Theorem 3.4, (iii), (iv)], then deg(Ψrlf)=1 .I f ,
moreover, there exists a ﬁnite extension L1 ⊆ ˜F1 of F1 which is Galois over Q,
then the corresponding [i.e., via the equivalence D1
∼
→D 2 induced by Ψ — cf. (i);
Corollary 4.11, (ii)] ﬁnite extension L2 ⊆ ˜F2 of F2 is isomorphic to L1 in a fashion
that is compatible with an isomorphism F1 ∼= F2.
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). We have already seen in Example 6.3 that
the Frobenioid C is ofisotropic and birationally Frobenius-normalizedtype, and that
Φi s nonzero [so C is not of group-like type] and perf-factorial. As was observed in
the proof of Theorem 6.2, (iii), (iv),D is Frobenius-slimand ofFSM-type, hence also
of FSMFF-type. Moreover, since any automorphism of a number ﬁeld that ﬁxes all
of the valuations of the number ﬁeld is clearly equal to the identity automorphism,
it follows immediately that Φ is non-dilating,a n dt h a tD is Div-slim [relative to Φ,
hence also relative to Φpf,Φ rlf]. Also, it is immediate from the deﬁnition of B that
C is of [strictly] rational type, and that every object of ( Cun-tr)birat is Frobenius-
compact. Thus, we conclude that C [hence also Cpf, Crlf, Cun-tr,( Cpf)un-tr —c f .
Proposition 5.5, (iii)] is of rationally standard type. The proof of the criterion for
D to be slim is entirely similar to the proof given for Theorem 6.2, (iv). Finally, to
show that the surjection
δA :P i cΦ(A) ↠ R
is, in fact, an isomorphism, it suﬃces to verify that the image of Φ birat(L) ⊗Z R =
(L×)⊗ZR in (Φrlf
factor)gp(L) is equal to the set of elements of (Φrlf
factor)gp(L) with ﬁnite
support whose image under degarith
L is 0. But this is an immediate consequence of
the well-known Dirichlet unit theoremof classical number theory [cf., e.g., [Lang2],
p. 104]. This completes the proof of assertion (i).
Now assertion (ii) follows by observing that the isomorphism of groups
PicΦ(A1)
∼
→ PicΦ(A2)
determined by Ψrlf [cf. assertion (i); Corollary 4.10; Corollary 4.11, (iii)] iscompat-
ible with the “order structure” induced on both sides [via δA1 , δA2 ] by the “order

116 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
structure” of R. [Indeed, this compatibility follows from the fact that the isomor-
phism in question arises from an isomorphism of monoids Φ rlf
1 (A1)
∼
→ Φrlf
2 (A2).]
This completes the proof of assertion (ii).
Next, we observe that assertion (iii) follows formally from assertion (ii), by
applying Lemma 6.5, (ii), below in the following fashion: If deg(Ψ rlf) ̸∈ Q>0,
then one veriﬁes immediately that there exist three nonarchimedean valuations
w
1,w3,w5 ∈ V(L1) lying over primes p1,p3,p5 ∈ Primes, respectively, with the
property that w1 ↦→ w2 ∈ V(L2), w3 ↦→ w4 ∈ V(L2), w5 ↦→ w6 ∈ V(L2), where w2,
w4, w6 lie over primesp2,p4,p6 ∈ Primes, respectively, such thatp1,p2,p3,p4,p5,p6
are distinct. But this implies that
log(p1)/log(p2), log(p3)/log(p4), log(p5)/log(p6) ∈ (deg(Ψrlf))−1 · Q>0
in contradiction to Lemma 6.5, (ii). Thus, deg(Ψ rlf) ∈ Q>0. The ﬁnal portion of
assertion (iii) concerning valuations of Q now follows from Lemma 6.5, (i). This
completes the proof of assertion (iii).
Finally, we consider assertion (iv). Suppose that v1 ∈ V(L1) maps to v2 ∈
V(L2) [cf. the notation of the statement of assertion (iii)]. For i =1 , 2, write
deg(Li,v i)
for the number of valuations∈ V(Li), including vi, that lie over the same valuation
of Q as vi.T h e nb yTchebotarev’s density theorem[cf., e.g., [Lang2], Chapter VIII,
§4, Theorem 10], it follows that [Li : Q] is equal to themaximum of the deg(Li,v i),
as vi ranges over the elements ofV(Li). Moreover, if vi is nonarchimedean and lies
over a prime pi ∈ V(Li), then pi splits completely in Li if and only if deg(Li,v i)=
[Li : Q]. Thus, it follows that if v1, v2 lie over a prime p ∈ Primes [cf. assertion
(iii)], then [again by assertion (iii)] p splits completely in L1 if and only if p splits
completely in L2. If this is the case, then it follows that degarith
Li maps a generator
of the monoid Φi(Li)vi (∼= Z≥0) to log(p). Thus, we conclude that deg(Φrlf) = 1, as
desired. Note that this implies that v1 is of degree 1 [i.e., degarith
L1 maps a generator
of the monoid Φ1(L1)v1 (∼= Z≥0) to log(p)] if and only if v2 is of degree 1. Thus, if
L1 is Galois over Q, then whenever v2 is of degree 1, it follows that v1 is of degree
1, hence that p splits completely in L1 [since L1 is Galois over Q]. But this implies
[again by Tchebotarev’s density theorem — cf., e.g., [NSW], Theorem 12.2.5] that
L
1 ⊆ L2, hence that L1 = L2 [since we have already seen that [L1 : Q]=[ L2 : Q]].
This completes the proof of assertion (iv). ⃝
Lemma 6.5. (Transcendental Properties of Logarithms of Prime
Numbers)
(i) The real numbers log(p) ∈ R,w h e r ep ranges over the prime numbers, are
linearly independent over Q.
(ii) Let p1,p2,...,p 6 be distinct prime numbers. Then there do not exist
λ1,λ2 ∈ Q>0 such that: log(p1)/log(p2)= λ1·log(p3)/log(p4)= λ2·log(p5)/log(p6).

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 117
Proof. Assertion (i) is a formal consequence of the fact that Z is a unique factor-
ization domain. Assertion (ii) is a consequence of a theorem of Lang [cf. [Lang1];
[Baker], p. 119]: Indeed, since the log( pi)a r elinearly independent over Q [by as-
sertion (i)], it follows that each of the following two sets of numbers is alsolinearly
independent over Q:
{log(p2), log(p4), log(p6)}; {1, log(p3)/log(p4)}
Moreover, all six products of one element from the ﬁrst set and one element from
the second set are of the form μ · log(pi), where μ ∈ Q>0. Thus, the exponential of
each of these products is algebraic, in contradiction to Lang’s theorem. ⃝

118 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Appendix: Slim Exponentiation
In the present Appendix, we discuss some elementary general nonsense con-
cerning slim categories.
Deﬁnition A.1.
(i) A 2-category of 1-categories will be called 2 -slim [cf. [Mzk7], Deﬁnition
1.2.4, (iii)] if every 1-morphism [i.e., functor] in the 2-category has no nontrivial
automorphisms.
(ii) If D is a 2-category of 1-categories, then we shall write
|D|
for the associated 1-category whose objects are objects of D and whose morphisms
are isomorphism classes of morphisms of D [cf. [Mzk7], Deﬁnition 1.2.4, (iv)]. We
shall also refer to |D| as the coarsiﬁcation of C.
Remark A.1.1. The name “coarsiﬁcation” is motivated by the theory of “coarse
moduli spaces” associated to (say) “ﬁne moduli stacks” [cf. [Mzk7], Remark 1.2.4.1].
The following result may be regarded as a generalization of [Mzk7], Proposition
1.2.5, (ii) [a result concerning anabelioids], to the case of arbitrary slim categories.
Proposition A.2. (Slim Exponentiation) Let C be a slim category [cf. §0].
Let D be the 2-category of 1-categories deﬁned as follows: The objects of D
are the categories CA [cf. §0], where A ∈ Ob(A).T h e1-morphisms of D are the
functors
f! : CA →C B
[cf. §0] induced by morphisms f : A → B of C.T h e 2-morphisms of D are
isomorphisms between these functors [cf. §0]. Then D is 2-slim. Moreover, the
functor
E : C→| D |
A ↦→C A; f ↦→ f!
determines an equivalence of categories C
∼
→| D | . We shall refer to the functor
E as the slim exponentiation functor.
Proof. The fact that D is 2-slim follows immediately from the assumption that
C is slim. Now it is immediate from the deﬁnitions that E is full and essentially
surjective.T o v e r i f y t h a tE is faithful, let us ﬁrst observe that given any two
morphisms f,g : A → B of C, an isomorphism between the functors f!,g! : CA →
CB determines an isomorphism between the composites of the functors f!, g! with

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 119
the natural functor CB →C . On the other hand, these two composite functors
CA →C both coincide with the natural functor CA →C [i.e., that maps an object
C → A of CA to the object C of C]. Thus, any isomorphism f!
∼
→ g! determines an
automorphism of the natural functor CA →C , which [by the slimness of C!] is the
identity automorphism. But this implies [by applying the isomorphism f!
∼
→ g! to
the object A
idA
−→ A of CA]t h a tf = g, as desired. ⃝

120 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Index
1-commutative, §0
2-slim, A.1, (i)
abstract equivalence, §0
almost totally epimorphic, §0
anchor, §0
A-pair, proof of 5.1, (i)
arithmetic degree, 6.3
arithmetic divisor, 6.3
arithmetic line bundle, 6.3
Aut-ample, 1.2, (iv), (v)
Aut-saturated, §0
Autsub-ample, 1.2, (iv), (v)
Autsub-saturated, §0
Aut-type, §0
base category, 1.1, (iii), (iv)
base-equivalent, 1.2, (ii)
base-Frobenius pair (of a Frobenioid), 2.7, (iii)
base-Frobenius pair (of a Frobenius-trivial object), 5.6
base-FSM-morphism, 1.2, (ii)
base-identity, 1.2, (ii)
base-isomorphism (base-isomorphic), 1.2, (ii)
base-section, 2.7, (i)
base-trivial, 1.2, (iv), (v)
birationalization (of a Frobenioid), 4.4
birationally Frobenius-normalized, 4.5, (i)
bounded, §0
categorical ﬁber product, §0
categorical quotient, §0
centralizer, §0
characteristic, §0
characteristically injective, §0
characteristic splitting, 2.3
characteristic type, §0
co-angular, 1.2, (iii)
coarsiﬁcation, A.1, (ii)
connected category, §0
co-objective, §0
co-primary, 4.1, (iii)
co-prime type, 2.8, (iii)
Div-equivalent, 1.2, (ii)
Div-Frobenius-trivial, 1.2, (iv), (v)
Div-identity, 1.2, (ii)

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 121
divisorial, 1.1, (i)
divisor monoid, 1.1, (iv); 5.2, (ii)
Div-slim, 4.5, (iv)
eﬀective arithmetic divisor, 6.3
elementary Frobenioid, 1.1, (iii)
End-ample, 1.2, (iv), (v)
End-equivalence, §0
factorization homomorphism, 2.4, (i), (c)
factorization of morphisms of a Frobenioid, 1.3, (iv), (a)
factorization of pre-steps of a Frobenioid, 1.3, (v), (b), (c)
F-distinguished, 2.7, (ii)
ﬁberwise surjective, §0
ﬁnitely (respectively, countably) connected type, §0
FP -path, proof of 5.2, (iv)
Frobenioid, 1.3
Frobenius-ample, 1.2, (iv), (v)
Frobenius-compact, 1.2, (iv), (v)
Frobenius degree, 1.1, (iii), (iv)
Frobenius functor (on an elementary Frobenioid), 2.4, (iii)
Frobenius-isotropic, 1.2, (iv), (v)
Frobenius-normalized, 1.2, (iv), (v)
Frobenius-section, 2.7, (ii)
Frobenius-slim, 3.1, (i)
Frobenius-trivial, 1.2, (iv), (v)
FSMFF-type (category of), §0
FSMI-morphism, §0
FSM-morphism, §0
FSM-type (category of), §0
groupiﬁcation, §0
group-like (monoid), 1.1, (i)
group-like (object of a pre-Frobenioid), 1.2, (iv), (v)
immobile, §0
integral, §0
irreducible (element of a monoid), §0
irreducible (morphism of a category), §0
isometric morphism (isometry), 1.2, (i)
iso-subanchor, §0
isotropic, 1.2, (iv), (v)
isotropic hull, 1.2, (iv)
isotropiﬁcation functor, 1.9, (v)
˜K-Q-Cartier, 6.1
LB-invertible, 1.2, (iii)
left-hand isomorphism, 4.2, (iii)
linear morphism, 1.2, (i)

122 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
metrically equivalent, 1.2, (i)
metrically trivial, 1.2, (iv), (v)
mid-adjoint, §0
minimal-adjoint, §0
minimal-coadjoint, §0
mobile, §0
model Frobenioid, 5.2, (ii)
model type, 4.5, (i)
monoid, §0
monoid (on a category), 1.1, (ii)
monoid type, §0
mono-minimal, §0
monoprime, §0
morphism of Frobenius type, 1.2, (iii)
naive Frobenius functor, 2.1, (i)
natural projection functor, 1.1, (iii), (iv)
non-dilating (endomorphism), 1.1, (i)
non-dilating (monoid on a category), 1.1, (ii)
number ﬁeld, §0
one-morphism category, §0
one-object category, §0
opposite category, §0
(p1,p2)-admissible, proof of 3.4
P-distinguished, 2.7, (i)
perfection (of a Frobenioid), 3.1, (iii)
perfection (of a monoid), §0
perfect (monoid), §0
perfect (object of a pre-Frobenioid), 1.2, (iv)
perf-factorial, 2.4, (i)
pre-divisorial, 1.1, (i)
pre-Frobenioid, 1.1, (iv)
pre-Frobenioid structure, 1.1, (iv)
pre-model type, 2.7, (iii)
pre-step, 1.2, (iii)
primary (element of a monoid), §0
primary (pre-step), 1.2, (iii)
prime, §0
prime-Frobenius morphism, 1.2, (iii)
pro-l portion, 2.8, (ii)
pseudo-terminal, §0
pull-back morphism, 1.2, (ii)
quasi-base-Frobenius pair (of a Frobenioid), 2.7, (iii)
quasi-base-Frobenius pair (of a Frobenius-trivial object), 5.6
quasi-connected, §0
quasi-Frobenius-section, 2.7, (ii)

THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 123
quasi-Frobenius-trivial, 1.2, (iv), (v)
quasi-isotropic type, 3.1, (i)
raising to the ζ-th power, 2.8, (iii)
rational function monoid, 4.4, (ii); 5.2, (ii)
rationally standard type, 4.5, (iii)
rational object, 4.5, (ii)
rational type, 4.5, (ii)
realiﬁcation (of a Frobenioid), 5.3
realiﬁcation (of a perf-factorial monoid), 2.4, (i)
residually ﬁnite group, 3.1.2
right-hand isomorphism, 4.2, (iii)
rigid, §0
saturated, §0
sharp, §0
skeletal subcategory, §0
skeleton, §0
slim (category), §0
slim exponentiation functor, A.2
slim (proﬁnite group), §0
standard Frobenioid, 1.1, (iii)
standard type, 3.1, (i)
step, 1.2, (iii)
strictly rational object, 4.5, (ii)
strictly rational type, 4.5, (ii)
subanchor, §0
sub-automorphism, §0
subordinate, §0
sub-quasi-Frobenius-trivial, 1.2, (iv), (v)
supporting monoid type, 2.4, (ii)
support (of an element of a perf-factorial monoid), 2.4, (i), (d)
supremum, §0
terminal, §0
totally epimorphic, §0
twin-primary, proof of 4.9
unit-equivalence, 3.1, (iv)
unit-linear Frobenius functor, 2.5, (iii)
unit-proﬁnite type, 2.8, (i)
unit-trivial, 1.2, (iv), (v)
unit-trivialization (of a Frobenioid), 3.1, (iv)
unit-wise Frobenius functor, 2.6, 2.9
universally Div-Frobenius-trivial, 1.2, (iv), (v)
zero divisor, 1.1, (iii), (iv)

124 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Chart of Types of Morphisms in a Frobenioid
type of
 projection
 zero
 Frobenius
morphism
 to base
 divisor
 degree
linear
 ?
 ?
 1
isometry
 ?
 0
 ?
base-isomorphism
 isomorphism
 ?
 ?
base-FSM-morphism
 FSM-morphism
 ?
 ?
pull-back morphism
 ?
 0
 1
pre-step
 isomorphism
 ?
 1
step
 isomorphism
 ̸=0
 1
primary pre-step
 isomorphism
 primary
 1
isometric pre-step
 isomorphism
 0
 1
LB-invertible
 ?
 0
 ?
morphism of
Frobenius
 isomorphism
 0
 ?
type
prime-
Frobenius
 isomorphism
 0
 prime
morphism


THE GEOMETRY OF FROBENIOIDS I 125
Bibliography
[Baker] A. Baker, Transcendental number theory, Cambridge University Press (1975).
[Lang1] S. Lang, Algebraic values of meromorphic functions II, Topology5 (1966), pp.
363-370.
[Lang2] S. Lang, Algebraic number theory, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. (1970).
[Mzk1] S. Mochizuki, A Theory of Ordinary p-adic Curves, Publ. of RIMS 32 (1996),
pp. 957-1151.
[Mzk2] S. Mochizuki, Foundations of p-adic Teichm¨uller Theory, AMS/IP Studies
in Advanced Mathematics 11, American Mathematical Society/International
Press (1999).
[Mzk3] S. Mochizuki, A Survey of the Hodge-Arakelov Theory of Elliptic Curves I,
Arithmetic Fundamental Groups and Noncommutative Algebra, Proceedings of
Symposia in Pure Mathematics 70, American Mathematical Society (2002),
pp. 533-569.
[Mzk4] S. Mochizuki, A Survey of the Hodge-Arakelov Theory of Elliptic Curves II,
Algebraic Geometry 2000, Azumino, Adv. Stud. Pure Math. 36, Math. Soc.
Japan (2002), pp. 81-114.
[Mzk5] S. Mochizuki, The Absolute Anabelian Geometry of Hyperbolic Curves,Galois
Theory and Modular Forms, Kluwer Academic Publishers (2003), pp. 77-122.
[Mzk6] S. Mochizuki, The Absolute Anabelian Geometry of Canonical Curves,Kazuya
Kato’s ﬁftieth birthday, Doc. Math. 2003, Extra Vol. , pp. 609-640.
[Mzk7] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of Anabelioids, Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci. 40
(2004), pp. 819-881.
[Mzk8] S. Mochizuki, Categorical representation of locally noetherian log schemes,
Adv. Math. 188 (2004), pp. 222-246.
[Mzk9] S. Mochizuki, Categories of log schemes with Archimedean structures,J. Math.
Kyoto Univ. 44 (2004), pp. 891-909.
[Mzk10] S. Mochizuki, Galois Sections in Absolute Anabelian Geometry,Nagoya Math.
J. 179 (2005), pp. 17-45.
[Mzk11] S. Mochizuki, Semi-graphs of Anabelioids, Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci. 42
(2006), pp. 221-322.
[Mzk12] S. Mochizuki, A combinatorial version of the Grothendieck conjecture,Tohoku
Math J. 59 (2007), pp. 455-479.
[Mzk13] S. Mochizuki, Conformal and Quasiconformal Categorical Representation of
Hyperbolic Riemann Surfaces, Hiroshima Math. J. 36 (2006), pp. 405-441.
[Mzk14] S. Mochizuki, Absolute anabelian cuspidalizations of proper hyperbolic curves,
J. Math. Kyoto Univ. 47 (2007), pp. 451-539.

126 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
[Mzk15] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of Frobenioids II: Poly-Frobenioids, RIMS Preprint
1530 (February 2006).
[Mzk16] S. Mochizuki, The ´Etale Theta Function and its Frobenioid-theoretic Manifes-
tations, RIMS Preprint 1569 (September 2006); updated version available at
the following web site:
http://www.kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp/~motizuki/papers-english.html
[NSW] J. Neukirch, A. Schmidt, K. Wingberg,Cohomology of number ﬁelds, Grundlehren
der Mathematischen Wissenschaften 323, Springer-Verlag (2000).
[Szp] L. Szpiro, Degr´es, intersections, hauteurs in Ast´erisque 127 (1985), pp. 11-28.