The Geometry of Anabelioids
Shinichi MOCHIZUKI*
Contents:
§0. Notations and Conventions
§1. Anabelioids
§1.1. The Notion of an Anabelioid
§1.2. Finite ´Etale Morphisms
§2. Cores and Quasi-Cores
§2.1. Localizations and Cores
§2.2. Holomorphic Structures and Commensurable Terminality
§2.3. Quasi-Cores and Intrinsic Exhaustivity
§2.4. Canonical Construction of the Fundamental Group
§3. Anabelioids Arising from Hyperbolic Curves
§3.1. Anabelioid-Theoretic Interpretation of Scheme-Theoretic Cores
§3.2. The Logarithmic Special Fiber via Quasi-Cores
Communicated by T. Kawai. Received October 20, 2003. Revised January 15, 2004.
2000 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation: 14H30
*Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Kyoto University , Kyoto 606-8502, Japan
Typeset by AMS-TEX
1

2 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
Introduction
The goal of the present manuscript is to consider the following question:
To what extent can thefundamental group of a Galois category be con-
structed in a canonical fashion which is independent of a choice of
basepoint?
Put another way, we would like to consider the extent to which the elements (consid-
ered, say, up to conjugation) of the fundamental group may be assignedcanonical
names,o r labels.
In §1, §2, we consider this issue from avery general point of view.T h a t i s t o s a y ,
we develop the general theory of “anabelioids” — i.e., “multi-Galois categories”
in the terminology of [SGA1]— with an eye to giving an answer to this question.
We use the new terminology “anabelioid”, partly because it is shorter than “(multi-
)Galois category”, and partly because we wish to emphasize that we would like to
treat such objects from a fundamentally diﬀerent point of view — a point of view
partially motivated by Grothendieck’s anabelian philosophy (cf. [Groth]; Remark
1.1.4.1 below) — from the point of view taken in [SGA1]: Namely, we would like to
regard anabelioids as the primary geometric objects of interest, which themselves
form a category [i.e., not as a category containing as objects the primary geometric
objects of interest].
Our main result in §1, §2, is Theorem 2.4.3, which states that:
When an anabelioid possesses a“faithful quasi-core”(cf. Deﬁnition 2.3.1),
then its fundamental group may be constructed in a canonical fashion as
a proﬁnite group.
The notion of a “quasi-core” is motivated partly by the notion of a“hyperbolic core”
(cf. [Mzk3]) and partly by the “Motivating Example” given below. The condition
for a quasi-core states, roughly speaking, that a certain “forgetful functor” from a
category of geometric objects equipped with some special auxiliary structure to the
category of the same geometric objects not equipped with this auxiliary structure
is, in fact, an equivalence. Indeed, this general pattern of considering such forgetful
functors which are, in fact, equivalences is an importanttheme in the present man-
uscript (cf. Deﬁnition 2.3.1, as well as Theorem 2.4.2). One elementary example
of this sort of phenomenon — which was, in fact, one of the main motivations for
the introduction of the notion of a “quasi-core” — is the following example from
elementary complex analysis:
Motivating Example: Metrics on Hyperbolic Riemann Surfaces. A
connected Riemann surface is calledhyperbolicif its universal covering is biholomor-
phic to theupper half plane. An arbitrary Riemann surface will be called hyperbolic
if every connected component of this Riemann surface is hyperbolic. Let us write
Loc
hyp

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 3
for the category whose objects are hyperbolic Riemann surfaces and whose mor-
phisms are ´etale morphisms [i.e., holomorphic maps with everywhere nonvanishing
derivative]. If X ∈ Ob(Lochyp) is a object of Loc hyp, then we shall refer to the
metric on its tangent bundle determined by the standard Poincar´e metric on the
upper half plane [which is biholomorphic to the universal covering of every con-
nected component of X]a st h ecanonical metricon X.I f f : X → Y is a morphism
in Lochyp, then we shall say that this morphism f is integral if the norm of its
derivative [when measured with respect to the canonical metrics on the tangent
bundles of X, Y ]i s ≤ 1. Let us write
Lochyp
int ⊆ Lochyp
for thesubcategorywhose objects are the objects of Lochyp and whosemorphisms are
the integralmorphisms of Lochyp. Then it follows from the“theory of the Kobayashi
hyperbolic metric”that the natural inclusion functor
Lochyp
int ↪→ Lochyp
is, in fact, an equivalence. At a more concrete level, one veriﬁes easily that the
essential substantive fact that one needs to show this equivalence is the well-known
Schwarz lemma of elementary complex analysis [to the eﬀect that any holomorphic
function φ : D → C on the open unit disc D in the complex plane satisfying
φ(0) = 0, |φ(z)|≤ 1( f o ra l lz ∈ D), necessarily satisﬁes |φ′(0)|≤ 1]. This lemma
of Schwarz in turn may be regarded as a formal consequence of the well-known
“maximum modulus principle” of elementary complex analysis.
From a category-theoretic point of view, the point of this example is that,
although the object of Lochyp determined by the upper half plane is by no means
a terminal object in Lochyp — i.e., a “core” (cf. the theory of [Mzk3]) — the fact
that the inclusion functor Loc hyp
int ↪→ Lochyp is an equivalence serves to express,
in a rigorous mathematical fashion, the sentiment that, in some sort of “metric”
sense, the upper half plane “almost serves as a core” for Lochyp. It is this set of
circumstances that led the author to the introduction of the notion of a “quasi-
core”.
This example also suggests an interesting relationship between the notions
of uniformization and of canonical labels for elements of the fundamental group:
Namely, the Koebe uniformization theorem for hyperbolic Riemann surfaces gives
rise to “canonical labels” (up to an ambiguity arising from some sort of conjuga-
tion action) via 2 by 2 matrices since it induces an embedding of the topological
fundamental group of the Riemann surface into PSL
2(R).
This leads us to the content of §3: In §3, we discuss the theory of §1, §2, in
the case of hyperbolic curves over p-adic and number ﬁelds. In this case, our main
result — Theorem 3.1.6 — states that:
If a non-proper hyperbolic curve over such a ﬁeld is a “geometric core”
(i.e., a core as in [Mzk3]), then its associated anabelioid admits a faithful
quasi-core.

4 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
This allows us to assign “canonical names” to the elements of its arithmetic
fundamental group in a fashion reminiscent of the way in which the Koebe uni-
formization theorem allows one to assign “canonical names” to the elements of the
topological fundamental group of a hyperbolic Riemann surface. This main result
is, in essence, a formal consequence of Theorem A of [Mzk6], and may be regarded
as an interpretation of the main result of [Mzk9],§2, via thegeometry of anabelioids.
Acknowledgements: I would like to thank A. Tamagawa for countless stimulating
discussions concerning the theory presented in this paper and especially for his com-
ments concerning the theory of quasi-cores and intrinsic exhaustivity (cf. Remarks
2.3.6.2, 2.3.7.1 in the text). Also, I would like to thank T. Tsuji for pointing out
to me (cf. [Mzk2], §1) an error in [Mzk1], Chapter IX — an event which opened
my eyes to the importance (in the context of the arithmetic Kodaira-Spencer mor-
phism) ofkeeping track of basepoints. Finally, I would like to thankH. Nakamurafor
organizing a conference on arithmetic fundamental groups at RIMS, Kyoto Univer-
sity, in October 2001, at which the author was aﬀorded the opportunity to present
a “preliminary version”(cf. [Mzk7]) of the ideas exposed in the present paper.

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 5
Section 0: Notations and Conventions
Numbers:
We will denote by N the set of natural numbers, by which we mean the set of
integers n ≥ 0. A number ﬁeld is deﬁned to be a ﬁnite extension of the ﬁeld of
rational numbers Q.
Topological Groups:
Let G be a Hausdorﬀ topological group,a n dH ⊆ G a closed subgroup.L e tu s
write
ZG(H)
def
= {g ∈ G | g · h = h · g, ∀h ∈ H}
for the centralizer of H in G;
NG(H)
def
= {g ∈ G | g · H · g−1 = H}
for the normalizer of H in G;a n d
CG(H)
def
= {g ∈ G | (g · H · g−1)
⋂
H has ﬁnite index in H, g · H · g−1}
for the commensurator of H in G. Note that: (i) ZG(H), NG(H)a n dCG(H)a r e
subgroups of G; (ii) we have inclusions
H, Z G(H) ⊆ NG(H) ⊆ CG(H)
and (iii) H is normal in NG(H).
Note that ZG(H), NG(H)a r ealways closed in G, while CG(H)i s not neces-
sarily closed in G.
Indeed, one may construct such an example as follows: Let
M
def
=
∏
N
Zp
endowed with the product topology(of the various copies of Zp equipped with their
usual topology). Thus, M is a Hausdorﬀ topological group.F o r n ∈ N,w r i t e
Fn(M) ⊆ M for the sub-topological group given by the product of the copies
of Zp indexed by m ≥ n. Write Aut F (M) for the set of automorphisms of the
topological group M that preserve the ﬁltration F ∗(M)o n M.I f α ∈ AutF (M),
then for every n ∈ N, α induces a continuous homomorphism αn : M/F n(M) →
M/F n(M) which is clearly surjective, hence an isomorphism (since M/F n(M)i s
proﬁnite and topologically ﬁnitely generated — cf. [FJ], Proposition 15.3). It
thus follows that α induces an isomorphism Fn(M)
∼
→ Fn(M), hence that the
inverse of α also lies in Aut F (M). In particular, we conclude that Aut F (M)i s

6 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
a group. Equip Aut F (M)w i t ht h ecoarsest topology for which all of the homo-
morphisms AutF (M) → Aut(M/F n(M)) (where Aut( M/F n(M)) ∼= GLn(Zp)i s
equipped with its usual topology) are continuous. Note that relative to this topol-
ogy, AutF (M) forms a Hausdorﬀ topological group. Now deﬁne G to be the semi-
direct productof M with AutF (M)( s oG is a Hausdorﬀ topological group), and H
to be ∏
n∈N
pn · Zp ⊆
∏
N
Zp = M
(so H ⊆ G is a closed subgroup). Then CG(H)i s not closed in G. For instance,
if one denotes by en ∈ ∏
N Zp the vector with a 1 in the n-th place and zeroes
elsewhere, then the limit A∞ (where
A∞ (en)
def
= en + en+1
for all n ∈ N) of the automorphisms Am ∈ CG(H)( w h e r eAm(en)
def
= en + en+1 if
n ≤ m, Am(en)
def
= en if n>m ) is not contained in CG(H).
Curves:
Suppose that g ≥ 0i sa n integer.T h e nafamily of curves of genus g
X → S
is deﬁned to be a smooth, proper, geometrically connected morphismX → S whose
geometric ﬁbers are curves of genus g.
Suppose that g,r ≥ 0a r eintegers such that 2g − 2+ r> 0. We shall denote
the moduli stack of r-pointed stable curves of genus g (where we assume the points
to be unordered)b y
 Mg,r (cf. [DM], [Knud] for an exposition of the theory of such
curves; strictly speaking, [Knud] treats the ﬁnite ´etale covering of
 Mg,r determined
by ordering the marked points). The open substackMg,r ⊆
 Mg,r of smooth curves
will be referred to as the moduli stack of smooth r-pointed stable curves of genus g
or, alternatively, as the moduli stack of hyperbolic curves of type(g,r ).
A family of hyperbolic curves of type (g,r )
X → S
is deﬁned to be a morphism which factors X↪ → Y → S as the composite of an
open immersion X↪ → Y onto the complement Y \D of a relative divisor D ⊆ Y
which is ﬁnite ´etale over S of relative degree r, and a family Y → S of curves of
genus g. One checks easily that, if S is normal, then the pair (Y,D )i s unique up
to canonical isomorphism. (Indeed, when S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld, this fact
is well-known from the elementary theory of algebraic curves. Thus, the asserted
uniqueness follows formally from the normality of S and the fact that
Mg,r is a
separated algebraic stack (cf. [DM], [Knud]).) We shall refer to Y (respectively,
D; D; D)a st h ecompactiﬁcation (respectively, divisor at inﬁnity ; divisor of cusps;

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 7
divisor of marked points)o f X.A family of hyperbolic curves X → S is deﬁned to
be a morphism X → S such that the restriction of this morphism to each connected
component of S is a family of hyperbolic curves of type(g,r ) for some integers (g,r )
as above.
Next, we would like to consider “orbicurves”. We shall say that an algebraic
stack is generically scheme-like if it admits an open dense algebraic substack which
is isomorphic to a scheme. Let X be a smooth, geometrically connected, generically
scheme-like algebraic stack of ﬁnite type over a ﬁeld k of characteristic zero.T h e n
we shall say that X is an orbicurve if it is of dimension 1. We shall say thatX is a
hyperbolic orbicurve if it is an orbicurve which admits a compactiﬁcation X↪ →
 X
(necessarily unique!) by a proper orbicurve
 X over k such that if we denote the
reduced divisor
 X\X by D ⊆
 X,t h e n
X is scheme-like near D, and, moreover,
the line bundle ω
X/k(D)o n
 X has positive degree.A n example of a hyperbolic
orbicurve overk is given by the quotient — in the sense of stacks— of a hyperbolic
curve over k by the action of a ﬁnite group which acts freely on all but a ﬁnite
number of points of the curve.
Now suppose that
X
is a hyperbolic orbicurveover a ﬁeld k (of characteristic zero), with compactiﬁcation
X↪ →
 X.L e t
k be an algebraic closure of k.W r i t e
X →
 X
′
for the “coarse moduli space”(cf. [FC], Chapter I, Theorem 4.10) associated to
 X.
Thus,
 X
′
is a smooth, proper, geometrically connected curve over k.D e n o t e t h e
open subscheme of
 X
′
which is the image of X by X′.W r i t e :
N∞
def
=( N\{0,1})
⋃
{∞}
Then we shall say that the hyperbolic curve X is of type
(g,⃗r)
if
 X
′
is of genus g and ⃗r : N∞ → N is the function with ﬁnite support [i.e., which is
0 away from some ﬁnite subset of N∞ ] deﬁned as follows: ⃗r(∞ ) is the cardinality
of (
X
′
\X′)(
k). For every positive integer e ∈ N∞ , ⃗r(e) is the cardinality of the
set of
 k-valued points of X′ over which X is (necessarily tamely) ramiﬁed with
ramiﬁcation index e.
When k =
 k, it is well-known (and easily veriﬁed) that theisomorphism classof
the algebraic fundamental group π1(X)i s completely determined by the type(g,⃗r).

8 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
Categories:
We shall say that two arrows fi : Ai → Bi (where i =1 ,2) in a category C
are abstractly equivalent —a n dw r i t ef1
abs
≈ f2 — if there exists a commutative
diagram:
A1
∼
→ A2
⏐⏐
↓
f1
⏐
⏐
↓
f2
B1
∼
→ B2
(where the horizontal arrows are isomorphisms in C).
We shall refer to a natural transformation between functors all of whose com-
ponent morphisms are isomorphisms as an isomorphism between the functors in
question. A functor φ : C1 →C 2 between categories C1, C2 will be called rigid if φ
has no nontrivial automorphisms.
A diagram of functors between categories will be called 1 -commutative if the
various composite functors in question are rigid and isomorphic. When such a
diagram “commutes in the literal sense” we shall say that it 0 -commutes. Note
that when a diagram “1-commutes”, it follows from the rigidity hypothesis that
any isomorphism between the composite functors in question is necessarilyunique.
Thus, to state that the diagram 1-commutes does not result in any “loss of infor-
mation” by comparison to the datum of aspeciﬁc isomorphism between the various
composites in question.
We shall say that two rigid functors φ
i : Ci →C ′
i (where i =1 ,2; the Ci, C′
i
are categories) are abstractly equivalent —a n dw r i t eφ1
abs
≈ φ2 — if there exists a
1-commutative diagram
C1
∼
→C 2
⏐⏐
↓
φ1
⏐
⏐
↓
φ2
C′
1
∼
→C ′
2
(in which the horizontal arrows are equivalences of categories).

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 9
Section 1: Anabelioids
§1.1. The Notion of an Anabelioid
We begin by ﬁxing a (Grothendieck) universeV , in the sense of set-theory (cf.,
e.g., [McLn1]; [McLr], §12.1), in which we shall work. Also, let us assume that we
are given a V -small category Ensf of ﬁnite sets .
Let G be a (V -small) proﬁnite group — that is to say, the underlying proﬁnite
set of G is an inverse limit of V -sets indexed by a V -set. Then to G,w em a y
associate the (V -small) category
B(G)
of (V -small) ﬁnite sets ∈ Ob(Ensf) with continuous G-action. This category is a(n)
(elementary) topos (in the sense of topos theory). In fact, it forms a rather special
kind of topos called a Galois category (cf. [John1] for an exposition of the general
theory of topoi and, in particular, of Galois categories; cf. also [SGA1], Expos´eV ) .
Deﬁnition 1.1.1. We shall refer to as a connected anabelioid any category X
which is equivalent to a category of the form B(G) for some proﬁnite group G.
Remark 1.1.1.1. Thus, a “connected anabelioid” is the same as aGalois category
(as deﬁned, for instance, in [John1], p. 285) — i.e., a “Boolean topos” that admits
an “exact, isomorphism reﬂecting functor” to the category of ﬁnite sets.
Let X be a connected anabelioid. Then recall (cf. [SGA1], Expos´eV , §5) the
notion of a fundamental functor
β∗ : X→ Ensf
— i.e., an exact functor. Here, we recall that an exact functor is a functor that
preserves ﬁnite limits and ﬁnite colimits. Note that (since X is assumed to be a
connected anabelioid) an exact functor β∗ : X→ Ensf is necessarily isomorphism
reﬂecting (i.e., a morphism α of X is an isomorphism if and only if β∗(α)i s ) .
Recall, moreover, that if X
def
= B(G), and β∗ : B(G) → Ensf is the functor deﬁned
by forgetting the G-action, then G may be recovered,u pt o inner automorphism,
from X, β as the group:
Aut(β∗)
Also, let us recall that any two fundamental functors are isomorphic. Note that
Ensf itself is a connected anabelioid (i.e., the result of applying B(−) to the trivial
group), so we may think of fundamental functors as “basepoints” in the following
way:

10 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
Deﬁnition 1.1.2.
(i) If X and Y are connected anabelioids, then we deﬁne amorphism φ : X→ Y
to be an exact functor φ∗ : Y→X (cf. [SGA1], Expos´e V, Proposition 6.1). An
isomorphism between connected anabelioids is a morphism whose corresponding
functor in the opposite direction is an equivalence of categories.
(ii) We deﬁne a basepoint of a connected anabelioid X to be a morphism β :
Ensf →X .I f β is a basepoint of X, then we refer to the group Aut( β)a st h e
fundamental group π1(X,β) of (X,β).
Remark 1.1.2.1. Thus, the “category of (V -small) connected anabelioids”is a 2-
category (cf., e.g., [John1], §0.1; [McLr], Chapter 12; [McLn2], XII), hence requires
special care, for instance, when considering composites, etc. Also, we remark,
relative to the standard terminology of category theory, that if φ : X→ Y is an
isomorphism (of connected anabelioids), it will not, in general, be the case that φ∗
is an isomorphism of categories (i.e., an equivalence for which the correspondence
between classes of objects in the two categories is a bijection — cf. [McLn2], IV,
§4).
Remark 1.1.2.2. Since the isomorphism class of the fundamental groupπ1(X,β)
is independent of the choice of basepointβ, we will also speak of the “fundamental
group π1(X) of X” when the choice of basepoint is irrelevant to the issue under
discussion.
Remark 1.1.2.3. Note that a functor φ∗ : Y→X which is an equivalence is
always necessarily exact. Thus, an isomorphism of anabelioids φ : X→ Y is simply
an equivalence φ∗ : Y→X in the opposite direction.
Example 1.1.3. Anabelioids Associated to Schemes. Let X be a (V -small)
connected locally noetherian scheme. Then we shall denote by
´Et(X)
the category whose objects are (V -small) ﬁnite ´etale coverings of X and whose
morphisms are morphisms of schemes over X. Then it is well-known (cf. [SGA1],
Expos´eV , §7) that ´Et(X) is a connected anabelioid.
If G is a proﬁnite group, then we shall use the notation
Aut(G); Inn( G); Out( G)
def
=A u t (G)/Inn(G)
to denote the group of (continuous) automorphisms (respectively, inner automor-
phisms; (continuous) outer automorphisms)o f G.I f H is another proﬁnite group,

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 11
then we shall write Hom(G,H ) for the set of continuous homomorphisms G → H,
and
HomOut(G,H )
for the set of continuous outer homomorphisms G → H, i.e., the quotient of
Hom(G,H ) by the natural action of H from the right. Also, we shall write
HomOut(G,H )
for the (V -small) category whose objects are the elements of the set Hom( G,H )
and for which the morphisms
MorHomOut (ψ1,ψ2)
from an object ψ1 : G → H to an object ψ2 : G → H are the elements h ∈ H such
that ψ2(g)= h · ψ1(g) · h−1, ∀g ∈ G. Thus, Hom Out(G,H ) may be thought of as
the set of isomorphism classes of the category HomOut(G,H ).
Proposition 1.1.4. (The “Grothendieck Conjecture” for Connected
Anabelioids) Let X
def
= B(G), Y
def
= B(H) (where G, H are proﬁnite groups), and
β : Ensf →X , γ : Ensf →Y be the tautological basepoints of X, Y, respectively,
determined by the deﬁnition of the notation “ B(−)”. Then:
(i) There is a natural equivalence of categories:
HomOut(G,H )
∼
→ Mor(X, Y)
which induces a natural bijection:
HomOut(G,H )
∼
→ Mor(X, Y)
Here, Mor(X, Y) (respectively, Mor(X, Y)) denotes the category (respectively, set
of isomorphism classes) of morphisms X→ Y .
(ii) There is a natural bijection:
Hom(G,H )
∼
→ Mor{(X,β);( Y,γ)}
Here, Mor{(X,β);( Y,γ)} denotes the set of (isomorphism classes of) morphisms
φ : X→ Y such that φ ◦β = γ.
Proof. Let us ﬁrst consider the situation of (2). Given a homomorphism ψ : G →
H, composition with ψ induces a continuous action of G on any ﬁnite set with
continuous H-action. Moreover, this operation does not aﬀect the underlying ﬁnite
set, so we get an elementψMor ∈ Mor{(X,β);( Y,γ)}. This deﬁnes the morphism of
(2). On the other hand, given an element φ ∈ Mor{(X,β);( Y,γ)}, it follows from
the deﬁnitions that φ induces a morphism Aut( β) → Aut(γ). One checks easily

12 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
that this correspondence deﬁnes a two-sided inverse (well-deﬁned up to composition
with an inner automorphism of Aut(γ) ∼= H) to the correspondence ψ ↦→ ψMor.
Next, we consider the situation of (1). By the above paragraph, we get a
morphism
Hom(G,H ) → Mor(X, Y)
Let us ﬁrst verify that this morphism is a surjection. Denote by S the pro-object
of Y whose underlying proﬁnite set Sset = H and whose H-action is given by the
usual action on Sset = H from the left. Note that the group of automorphisms
AutY(S)o f S (as a pro-object of Y) may be identiﬁed with H via the action of H
on Sset = H from the right. In fact, this action of H on S (from the right) endows
S with a structure of “H-torsor object”of Y.T h u s , i fφ : X→ Y is a morphism,
then T
def
= φ∗(S)i sa n H-torsor object of X. If we think of T as a proﬁnite set
Tset equipped with a G-action from the left and an H-action from the right,t h e n
let us observe that, by ﬁxing some element t ∈ Tset, we may identify the group of
automorphisms AutH(Tset) of the proﬁnite setTset that commute with theH-action
from the right with H via its action from the left. Here, we observe that such an
identiﬁcation
AutH(Tset) ∼= H
is determined by the choice of a “basepoint” t ∈ Tset, hence is well-deﬁned, up
to composition with an inner automorphism of H. It thus follows that the action
of G on Tset from the left determines a continuous outer homomorphism G →
AutH(Tset)= H which (cf. the preceding paragraph) gives rise to a morphism
X→ Y isomorphic to φ. This completes our veriﬁcation of surjectivity.
Thus, to complete the proof of (1), it suﬃces to verify that there is a natural
bijection between the set of isomorphisms between the morphisms φ1,φ2 : X→ Y
arising from two continuous homomorphisms
ψ1,ψ2 : G → H
and the subset Mor HomOut (ψ1,ψ2) ⊆ H. To verify this, let us observe that if we
pull-back the H-torsor object S of Y (cf. the preceding paragraph) via φ1,φ2 to
obtain H-torsor objects T1
def
= φ∗
1(S), T2
def
= φ∗
2(S)o f X, then it is a tautology that
isomorphisms φ1
∼
→ φ2 are in natural bijective correspondence with isomorphisms
T1
∼
→ T2 of H-torsor objects of X. Thus, the desired bijection is a consequence of
Lemma 1.1.5 below. ⃝
Lemma 1.1.5. (Two-Sided Group Actions) Let
ψ1,ψ2 : G → H
be continuous homomorphisms. Fori =1 ,2, denote byYi a copy ofH equipped with
the usual action of H from the right and the action of G determined by composing
the usual action ofH from the left with ψi; write ti for the copy of “1”i nYi.T h e n
ξ↦→ h ∈ H

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 13
—w h e r eh satisﬁes ξ(t1)= t2 ·h — determines a bijection from the set of(G,H )-
equivariant bijections ξ: Y1
∼
→ Y2 to the subset MorHomOut (ψ1,ψ2) ⊆ H.
Proof. Indeed,
t2 · h · ψ1(g)= ξ(t1) · ψ1(g)= ξ(t1 · ψ1(g)) = ξ(g · t1)= g · ξ(t1)= t2 · ψ2(g) · h
i.e., h ·ψ1(g) ·h−1 = ψ2(g), ∀g ∈ G.T h u s ,h ∈ MorHomOut (ψ1,ψ2) ⊆ H. Similarly,
if ψ1 and ψ2 diﬀer by composition with an inner automorphism of H deﬁned by
an element h ∈ MorHomOut (ψ1,ψ2), then t1 ↦→ t2 · h deﬁnes a ( G,H )-equivariant
bijection ξ, as desired. ⃝
Remark 1.1.4.1. Many readers may feel that Proposition 1.1.4 is “trivial” and
“well-known”. The reason that we nevertheless chose to give a detailed exposition
of this fact here is that it represents the essential spirit that we wish to convey
in the term “anabelioid”. That is to say, we wish to think of anabelioids X as
generalized spaces (which is natural since they are, after all, topoi — cf. [John2])
whose geometry just happens to be “completely determined by their fundamental
groups”(albeit somewhat tautologically!). This is meant to recall the notion of an
anabelian variety (cf. [Groth]), i.e., a variety whose geometry is determined by its
fundamental group. The point here (which will become clear as the manuscript
progresses) is that:
The introduction of anabelioids allows us to work with both “algebro-
geometric anabelioids” (i.e., anabelioids arising from (anabelian) varieties
— cf. Example 1.1.3) and “abstract anabelioids” (i.e., those which do not
necessarily arise from an (anabelian) variety) as geometric objects on
an equal footing.
The reason that it is important to deal with “geometric objects” as opposed to
groups, is that:
We wish to study what happens as one varies the basepoint of one of
these geometric objects.
That is to say, groups are determined only once one ﬁxes a basepoint. Thus, it
is diﬃcult to describe what happens when one varies the basepoint solely in the
language of groups.
Next, let
φ : X→ Y
be a morphism between connected anabelioids.W r i t e
I
φ ⊆X

14 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
for the smallest subcategory of X that contains all subquotients of objects in the
essential image of the pull-back functor φ∗. One veriﬁes immediately that Iφ is a
connected anabelioid. Note that the morphism φ : X→ Y factors naturally as a
composite
X→ I φ →Y
with the property that if we choose a basepoint βX of X and denote the result-
ing basepoints of Iφ, Y,b y βIφ , βY , respectively, then the induced morphisms of
fundamental groups
π1(X,βX ) ↠ π1(Iφ,βIφ ) ↪→ π1(Y,βY )
are a surjection followed by an injection. Moreover, we note the following conse-
quence of Proposition 1.1.4, (i):
Corollary 1.1.6. (Automorphism of an Arrow Between Connected
Anabelioids) The set of automorphismsAut(X→ Y ) of a1-arrow X→ Y between
connected anabelioids is in natural bijective correspondence with thecentralizer in
the fundamental group of Y of the image of the fundamental group of X.
Deﬁnition 1.1.7.
(i) We shall refer to Iφ as the image of X in Y.
(ii) We shall refer to a morphism φ : X→ Y between connected anabelioids
as a π1-epimorphism (respectively, π1-monomorphism) if the morphism Iφ →Y
(respectively, X→ I φ) is an equivalence.
Now let I be a ﬁnite set . Assume that for each i ∈ I,w ea r eg i v e naconnected
anabelioid Xi.W r i t e
XI
def
=
∏
i∈I
Xi
for the product of the categories Xi. In the terminology of [SGA1], Expos´eV , §9,
this XI is a “multi-Galois category”. In particular, XI is a topos.
Deﬁnition 1.1.8. Let X be a topos, and S ∈ Ob(X) an object of X.W r i t e
0X (respectively, 1X ) for the initial (respectively, terminal) object of X.T h e na n y
collection of data
S ∼=
∐
a∈A
Sa
(where 0X ̸∼= Sa ∈ Ob(X); the index set A is ﬁnite) will be called a decomposition
of S. The object S will be called connected if the index set of any decomposition
of S has cardinality one. The topos X will be called connected if 1X is connected.
Next, let us observe that:

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 15
The set I and the categories Xi (for i ∈ I), as well as the equivalence of
categories between XI with the product of the Xi may be recovered entirely
from the abstract category XI.
Indeed, let us denote (for i ∈ I) the object of XI obtained by taking the product
of 1Xi with the 0Xj (for j ̸= i)b y ϵi. Thus, we obtain a decomposition
1XI =
∐
i∈I
ϵi
of the object 1XI . Moreover, this decomposition is clearly maximal with respect
to the partial ordering on decompositions of 1XI determined by the (obviously
deﬁned) notion of reﬁnements of decompositions of 1XI . Thus, we see that this
decomposition may be recovered solely from internal structure of the category XI.
In particular, the ﬁnite set I may be recovered category-theoretically from the
category XI. Moreover, the category Xi may be recovered category-theoretically
from the category XI as the subcategory of objects over ϵi. Finally, it is clear that
these subcategories determine the equivalence of categories between XI with the
product of the Xi.
Deﬁnition 1.1.9. We shall refer to the Xi as the connected components of XI
and to π0(XI)
def
= I as the (ﬁnite) index set of connected components.
Deﬁnition 1.1.10.
(i) We shall refer to a category equivalent to a category of the form XI as an
anabelioid. We shall denote the 2-category of V -small anabelioids by
AnabV
(or simply Anab, when there is no danger of confusion).
(ii) A morphism between anabelioids is deﬁned to be an exact functor in the
opposite direction. An isomorphism between anabelioids is a morphism whose
corresponding functor in the opposite direction is an equivalence of categories.
Next, let us observe that if we are given a ﬁnite setJ, together with connected
anabelioids Yj for each j ∈ J,a n dmorphisms
ζ: I → J; φi : Xi →Y ζ(j)
we get an exact functor φ∗
I : YJ →X I (by forming the product of the φi), which
we would like to regard as a morphism φI : XI →Y J .
Proposition 1.1.11. (Morphisms of Not Necessarily Connected Anabe-
lioids) The association
{ζ,φi} ↦→ φI

16 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
deﬁnes an equivalence between the category of data on the left and the category of
arrows ψ : XI →Y J.
Proof. Indeed, this follows immediately by considering the pull-back of 1YJ ,a s
well as of its maximal decomposition, via the exact functor ψ∗, in light of the fact
(observed above) that
1XI =
∐
i∈I
ϵi
is the maximal (relative to reﬁnement) decomposition of 1XI . ⃝
Deﬁnition 1.1.12. We shall refer to a morphism between anabelioids as a π1-
epimorphism (respectively, π1-monomorphism) if each of the component morphisms
(cf. Proposition 1.1.11) between connected anabelioids is aπ1-epimorphism (respec-
tively, π1-monomorphism).
§1.2. Finite ´Etale Morphisms
In this §, we consider the notion of a“ﬁnite ´etale morphism”in the context of
anabelioids.
Let X be an anabelioid.L e tS ∈ Ob(X). We will denote the category ofobjects
over S by
XS
(i.e., the objects of XS are arrows T → S in X; the arrows of XS between T → S
and T ′ → S are S-morphisms T → T ′). Let us write
jS : XS →X
for the forgetful functor (i.e., the functor that maps T → S to T)a n d
i∗
S : X→ X S
for the functor given by taking the product with S.
Proposition 1.2.1. (The Extension Functor)
(i) The category XS is an anabelioid whose connected components are in
natural bijective correspondence with the connected components ofS.
(ii) The functor jS is left adjoint to the functor i∗
S.
(iii) The functor i∗
S is exact, hence deﬁnes a morphism of anabelioids iS :
XS →X .
(iv) Suppose thatS is the coproduct of a ﬁnite number of copies of1X (indexed,
say, by a (V -)set A). Then each connected component ofXS may be identiﬁed with

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 17
X; the set of connected components of XS may be identiﬁed with A. Moreover, jS
maps a collection of objects {Sa}a∈A of X indexed by A to the coproduct object
∐
a∈A
Sa
in X.
(v) Suppose that X = B(G) (where G is a ( V -small) proﬁnite group) and
that S is given by the G-set G/H,w h e r eH ⊆ G is an open subgroup.T h e n
iS : XS →X may be identiﬁed with [i.e., is “abstractly equivalent” (cf. §0) — in a
natural fashion — to] the morphism
B(H) →B (G)
induced by the inclusion H↪ → G. Moreover, if T ∈ Ob(XS) is represented by an
H-set Tset,t h e njS(T) is isomorphic to the G-set given by
(G × Tset)/H
where H ∋ h acts on G × Tset ∋ (g,t ) via (g,t ) ↦→ (hg, ht), and the G-action is the
action induced on (G × Tset)/H by letting G ∋ g act on G by multiplication by g−1
from the right.
Proof. These assertions all follow immediately from the deﬁnitions. ⃝
Thus, Proposition 1.2.1, (ii), shows that if φ : Y→X factors as the com-
posite of an isomorphism α : Y
∼
→X S with the morphism iS : XS →X for some
S ∈ Ob(X), then there is a natural choice for the isomorphism α, namely, the
isomorphism induced by the left adjoint φ! : Y→X to the functor φ∗. Indeed,
it follows from Proposition 1.2.1, (ii), that such a left adjoint φ! always exists and
that φ! induces an isomorphism Y
∼
→X Sφ ,w h e r eSφ
def
= φ!(1Y).
Deﬁnition 1.2.2.
(i) A morphism of anabelioids φ : Y→ X will be called ﬁnite ´etale if it factors
as the composite of an isomorphism α : Y
∼
→X S with the morphism iS : XS →X
for some S ∈ Ob(X).
(ii) Suppose that φ : Y→X is a ﬁnite ´etale morphism. Then we shall refer
to the left adjoint functor φ! to the pull-back functor φ∗ as the extension functor
associated to φ.
Remark 1.2.2.1. Thus, the morphism B(H) →B (G) induced by a continuous
homomorphism φ : H → G is ﬁnite ´etale if and only if φ is an injection onto an
open subgroup of G. Moreover, any ﬁnite ´etale morphism of connected anabelioids

18 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
may be written in this form (by choosing appropriate basepoints for the domain
and range). The characterization of Deﬁnition 1.2.2, (i), however, has the virtue of
being independent of choices of basepoints.
Deﬁnition 1.2.3. Let φ : Y→X be a ﬁnite ´etale morphism of anabelioids.
Then we shall say that φ is a covering (respectively, relatively connected)i ft h e
induced morphism π0(Y) → π0(X) on connected components (cf. Deﬁnition 1.1.9)
is surjective (respectively, an bijective).
Deﬁnition 1.2.4.
(i) LetG be a proﬁnite group. Then we shall say thatG is slim if the centralizer
ZG(H) of any open subgroup H ⊆ G in G is trivial.
(ii) Let X be an anabelioid. Then we shall say thatX is slim if the fundamental
group π1(Xi) of every connected component i ∈ π0(X)o f X is slim.
(iii) A morphism of anabelioids whose corresponding pull-back functor is rigid
will be called rigid. A 2-category of anabelioids will be called slim if every 1-
morphism in the 2-category is rigid.
(iv) If C is a 2-category, we shall write
|C|
for the associated 1-category whose objects are objects of C and whose morphisms
are isomorphism classes of morphisms of C. We shall also refer to |C| as the coar-
siﬁcation of C.
Remark 1.2.4.1. The name“coarsiﬁcation” is motivated by the theory of “coarse
moduli spaces” associated to (say) “ﬁne moduli stacks”.
Remark 1.2.4.2. Thus, a diagram of rigid morphisms of anabelioids“1-commutes”
(cf. §0) if and only if it commutes in the coarsiﬁcation.
In a word, the theory of coverings of anabelioids is easiest to understand when
the anabelioid in question is slim. For instance:
Proposition 1.2.5. (Slim Anabelioids) Let X be a slim anabelioid. Then:
(i) The pull-back and extension functors associated to a ﬁnite ´etale morphism
between slim anabelioids arerigid (cf. §0). In particular, if we write
Et(X) ⊆ Anab

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 19
for the 2-category whose(0-)objects are ﬁnite ´etale morphisms Y→X and whose
(1-)morphisms are ﬁnite ´etale arrows Y1 →Y 2 “over” X [i.e., in the sense of
“1-commutativity” — cf. §0], then Et(X) is slim. Write: ´Et(X)
def
= |Et(X)|.
(ii) The functor
FX : X→ ´Et(X)
S ↦→ (XS →X )
(where S ∈ Ob(X))i sa n equivalence (i.e., fully faithful and essentially surjec-
tive).
Proof. Indeed, (i) follows formally from Corollary 1.1.6 and Deﬁnition 1.2.4, (i),
(ii), (iii). As for (ii), essential surjectivity follows formally from Deﬁnition 1.2.2, (i).
To prove fully faithfulness, it suﬃces to compute, when X = B(G), Y1 = B(H1),
Y2 = B(H2), and H1, H2 are open subgroups of G, the subset
MorX (Y1, Y2) ⊆ Mor(Y1, Y2)
[i.e., of isomorphism classes of morphisms “over” X] via Proposition 1.1.4, (i).
This computation yields that the set in question is equal to the quotient, via the
conjugation action byH2, of the set of morphismsH1 → H2 induced by conjugation
by an elementg ∈ G such thatH1 ⊆ g ·H2 ·g−1. But this quotient may be identiﬁed
with the subset of elements g · H2 ∈ G/H2 such that H1 ⊆ g · H2 · g−1. Note that
here we must apply the assumption ofslimness, to conclude that it is not necessary
to quotient G/H2 any further by various centralizers inG of conjugates of H1.O n
the other hand, this quotient is simply another description of the set
HomG(G/H1,G / H2)
as desired. ⃝
Remark 1.2.5.1. By Proposition 1.2.5, (i), it follows that, at least when we
restrict our attention to ﬁnite ´etale morphisms of slim anabelioids, we do not “lose
any essential information” by working in the coarsiﬁcation (of Anab). Thus,
in the following discussion, we shall often do this, since this simpliﬁes things sub-
stantially. For instance, if φ : Y→X and ψ : Z→X are arbitrary ﬁnite ´etale
morphism of slim anabelioids, then [if we work in the coarsiﬁcation] it makes sense
to speak of the pull-back (of φ via ψ), or ﬁber product (of Y, Z over X):
Y×
X Z
Indeed, such an object may be deﬁned by the formula:
Zψ ∗(φ!(1Y)) →Z

20 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
By thinking of φ : Y→X as some “ XS →X ” as in the above discussion, one
veriﬁes easily that this deﬁnition satisﬁes all the expected properties. One veriﬁes
easily that all conceivable compatibilities are satisﬁed [e.g., when one interchanges
the roles of φ and ψ].
Remark 1.2.5.2. In fact, essentially all of the anabelioids that we shall actually
deal with in this paper will be slim. Thus, in some sense, it might have been more
natural to take the notion of a “slim anabelioid” as our deﬁnition of the term
“anabelioid”. There are two reasons why we chose not to do this: First, this would
requireus to prove slimness every time that we wish to use term “anabelioid”, which
would, in some sense, be rather unnatural, just as having to prove separatedness
every time one uses the term “scheme” (if, as in the earlier terminology, one deﬁnes
a scheme to be a “separated scheme” (in the current terminology)). Second, just as
with the separatedness of schemes, which is not a Zariski local notion, the notion
of slimness of an anabelioid is not (ﬁnite) ´etale local. (That is to say, a non-
slim anabelioid may admit a ﬁnite ´etale covering which is slim.) Thus, requiring
anabelioids to be slim would mean that the notion of an anabelioid is not “ﬁnite
´etale local”, which would again be unnatural.
Remark 1.2.5.3. Note that althoughF
X is fully faithful and essentially surjective,
substantial care should be exercised when speaking of FX as an “equivalence”. The
reason for this is that:
The collection of objects of´Et(X) or Et(X) necessarily belongs to alarger
Grothendieck universe — that is to say, unlike X,t h ec a t e g o r y´Et(X)
is no longer V -small — than the collection of objects of X.
Put another way,FX , i.e., the passage fromX to ´Et(X), may be thought of as a sort
of “change of Grothendieck universe, while keeping the internal category structure
intact”.
Just as in the theory of schemes, one often wishes to work not just with ﬁnite
´etale coverings, but also with“proﬁnite ´etale coverings”(i.e., projective systems of
´etale coverings). In the case of anabelioids, we make the following
Deﬁnition 1.2.6. We shall refer to as apro-anabelioid any “pro-object” (indexed
by a set)
X = lim←−α
Xα
relative to the coarsiﬁed category
Anab
def
= |Anab|
in which all of the transition morphisms Xα →X β are ﬁnite ´etale coverings of
slim anabelioids. Here, by “pro-object”, we mean an equivalence class of projective
systems (relative to the evident notion of equivalence).

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 21
Remark 1.2.6.1. Thus, (for us) pro-anabelioids only exist at the “coarsiﬁed
level”(unlike anabelioids, which may be treated either in Anab or in Anab).
Remark 1.2.6.2. Given a pro-anabelioid
X = lim←−α
Xα
it is natural to deﬁne the set of connected componentsof X by:
π0(X)
def
= lim←−α
π0(Xα)
In general, π0(X) will be a proﬁnite set . Moreover, for each i ∈ I,o n eo b t a i n sa
connected pro-anabelioid
Xi
by forming
lim←−α
of the compatible system of connected components of the Xα indexed by i.
Remark 1.2.6.3. Given two pro-anabelioids X = lim←−α Xα; Y = lim←−β Yβ,b yt h e
deﬁnition of a “pro-object”, it follows that:
Mor(X, Y) = lim←−
β
lim−→α
Mor(Xα, Yβ)
Note that this formula also applies in the case when one or both of X, Y is an
anabelioid, by thinking of anabelioids as pro-anabelioids indexed by the set with
one element.
Suppose that we are given a connected anabelioid X
def
= B(G)( w h e r eG is
a proﬁnite group). Let us write β : Ensf →X for the tautological basepoint of
B(G). Then one important example of a pro-anabelioid which forms a proﬁnite
´etale covering of X is the “universal covering” ˜Xβ, deﬁned as follows: For each
open subgroup H ⊆ G,l e tu sw r i t eXH
def
= B(H). (In other words, XH is the
category XS associated to the object S ∈ Ob(X) determined by the G-set G/H.)
Thus, if H′ ⊆ H, then we have a natural morphism XH′ →X H. Moreover, these
morphisms form a projective system whose transition morphisms are clearly ﬁnite
´etale coverings. Hence, we obtain a pro-anabelioid
˜Xβ
def
= lim←−
H
XH
(where H ranges over the open subgroups of G), together with a “proﬁnite ´etale
covering”
˜Xβ →X

22 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
which (just as in the case of schemes) has the property that the pull-back via
this covering of any ﬁnite ´etale covering Y→X splits (i.e., is isomorphic to the
coproduct of a ﬁnite number of copies of the base).
Deﬁnition 1.2.7. Let X be an anabelioid, and Y a pro-anabelioid. Then a
proﬁnite ´etale covering Y→X will be referred to as a universal covering of X if
it is relatively connected [i.e., given by a projective system of relatively connected
ﬁnite ´etale morphisms] and satisﬁes the property that the pull-back to Y of any
ﬁnite ´etale covering of X splits.
Note that by Proposition 1.2.5, (ii), it follows that whenX = B(G)i s slim,t h e
set
Mor
X ( ˜Xβ, XH)
may be identiﬁed with G/H. In particular, we obtain the result that the base-
point β is naturally equivalent to the restriction to the image of the functor FX of
Proposition 1.2.5, (ii), of the basepoint of ´Et(X) deﬁned by the formula:
MorX ( ˜Xβ, Y)
(where Y→ X is an object of ´Et(X)).
Proposition 1.2.8. (Basic Properties of Universal Coverings) Let X be
a slim anabelioid.T h e n :
(i) There exists a universal covering Y→X .
(ii) Any two universal coverings Y→X , Y′ →X are isomorphic over X.
(iii) Suppose that X is connected. Then the formula
β
/CT
X (S)
def
=M o rX ( ˜X, XS)
(where S ∈ Ob(X)) deﬁnes an equivalence of categories between the category
of universal coverings ˜X→ X (whose morphisms are isomorphisms ˜X
∼
→ ˜X ′
over X) and thecategory of basepointsβ : Ensf →X (whose morphisms β
∼
→ β′
are isomorphisms of functors (β′)∗ ∼
→ β∗). In particular, if ˜X→ X determines the
basepoint β
/CT
X ,t h e n
AutX ( ˜X)=A u t (β
/CT
X )= π1(X,β
/CT
X )
(where AutX ( ˜X) is the set of automorphisms relative to the category of universal
coverings just deﬁned).
(iv) Suppose that X
def
= B(G), X ′ def
= B(G′) are slim connected anabelioids. Let
˜X→ X , ˜X ′ →X ′ be the universal coverings determined by the tautological base-
points β, β′. Then, if we denote by Isom( ˜X, ˜X ′) the set of isomorphisms ˜X
∼
→ ˜X ′

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 23
which do not necessarily lie over some isomorphism X
∼
→X ′, we have a natural
isomorphism
Isog((X,β);( X ′,β ′))
def
=I s o m (˜X, ˜X ′)
∼
→ lim−→H
{open injections H↪ → G′}
(where H ranges over the open subgroups ofG).
Proof. Assertions (i), (ii) follow formally from the deﬁnitions and the above discus-
sion. Now let us consider assertion (iv). Suppose that we are given an isomorphism
φ : ˜X
∼
→ ˜X ′. By Proposition 1.1.4, (i), such a morphism arises from some homo-
morphism H → H′, determined up to conjugation with an inner automorphism
arising from H′. Here, we take H ⊆ G, H′ ⊆ G′ to be normal open subgroups.
If K′ ⊆ G is another normal open subgroup contained in H′, then there exists a
normal open subgroup K ⊆ G contained in H, together with a homomorphism
K → K′ (determined by φ, up to conjugation with an inner automorphism arising
from K′) such that the outer homomorphismH → H′ is compatible with the outer
homomorphism K → K′. Note, moreover, that since X ′ is slim,a unique homo-
morphism H → H′ up to conjugation with an inner automorphism arising fromK′
is determined by the homomorphism K → K′. (Indeed, this follows by considering
the faithful actions (by conjugation) of H, H′ on K, K′, respectively.) Thus, by
taking K′ to be arbitrarily small, we see thatφ determines a unique homomorphism
H → H′ ⊆ G′. Consideration of the inverse to φ shows that this homomorphism
H → G′ is necessarily an open injection. On the other hand, any open injection
H↪ → G′ clearly determines an isomorphism φ. This completes the proof of (iv).
Finally, we consider property (iii). Since it is clear that any isomorphism be-
tween universal coverings induces an isomorphism of the corresponding basepoints,
it suﬃces to prove property (iii) in the “automorphism” case. For simplicity, we
shall write X = B(G), and assume that the basepointβ in question is the tautolog-
ical basepoint. By property (iv), any isomorphism φ : ˜X
∼
→ ˜X arises from an open
injection H↪ → G. The fact that the composite of φ with ˜X→ X is isomorphic
to ˜X→ X implies (cf. Proposition 1.1.4, (i)) that this open injection H↪ → G is
induced by conjugation by aunique (by slimness) element ofG. On the other hand,
conjugation by an element of G clearly determines an element of AutX ( ˜X). Thus,
AutX ( ˜X)= G, as desired. ⃝
Remark 1.2.8.1. When (cf. Proposition 1.2.8, (iv)) β, β′ are ﬁxed throughout
the discussion, we shall write
Isog(X, X ′)
for Isog(( X,β);( X ′,β ′)). When ( X,β)=( X ′,β ′), we shall write Isog( X)f o r
Isog(X, X ′).
Finally, before proceeding, we present the following:

24 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
Deﬁnition 1.2.9.
(i) We shall say that a continuous homomorphism of Hausdorﬀ topological
groups G → H is relatively slim if the centralizer in H of the image of every open
subgroup of G is trivial.
(ii) We shall say that a morphism of anabelioids U→V is relatively slim if
the induced morphism between fundamental groups of corresponding connected
components of U, V is relatively slim.
Remark 1.2.9.1. Thus, X is slim if and only if the identity morphism X→ X is
relatively slim. Also, if U→V is relatively slim, then the arrow U→V is rigid [i.e.,
has no nontrivial automorphisms — cf. Corollary 1.1.6]. If U→ V is a relatively
slim morphism between connected anabelioids, then it follows that V is slim;i f ,
moreover, U→ V is a π1-monomorphism, then it follows that U is also slim.
Remark 1.2.9.2. The construction of a pull-back, or ﬁber product, discussed in
Remark 1.2.5.1 generalizes immediately to the case where φ : Y→X is a ﬁnite
´etale morphism of slim anabelioids,a n dψ : Z→X is an arbitrary relatively slim
morphism of slim anabelioids, via the formula of loc. cit.:
Zψ ∗(φ!(1Y)) →Z
One veriﬁes immediately that all conceivable compatibilities are satisﬁed.

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 25
Section 2: Cores and Quasi-Cores
§2.1. Localizations and Cores
In this §, we discuss the notion of a core in the context of slim anabelioids.
This notion will play a central role in the theory of the present paper.
Let X be a slim anabelioid.L e tu sw r i t e
Loc(X)( ⊆ Anab)
for the 2-category whose (0-)objects are (necessarily slim) anabelioids Y that admit
a ﬁnite ´etale morphism to X, and whose (1-)morphisms are ﬁnite ´etale morphisms
Y1 →Y 2 (that do not necessarily lie overX!). Note that given an object of Loc(X),
the set of connected components of this object may be recovered entirely category-
theoretically from the coarsiﬁcation
Loc(X)
def
= |Loc(X)|
of the 2-category Loc(X) (cf. Proposition 1.1.11).
Proposition 2.1.1. (Categories of Localizations) Let X be a slim anabe-
lioid.T h e n :
(i) Loc(X) is slim.
(ii) Denote by
Loc(X)
the 2-category whose (0-)objects Z are slim anabelioids which arise as ﬁnite
´etale quotients of objects in Loc(X) [i.e., there exists a ﬁnite ´etale morphism Y→
Z,w h e r eY∈ Ob(Loc(X))] and whose (1-)morphisms are ﬁnite ´etale morphisms.
Then the 2-category
 Loc(X) is slim. Write:
 Loc(X)
def
= |
Loc(X)|.
(iii) The 2-category
 Loc(X) (respectively, category
 Loc(X)) may be recon-
structed entirely category-theoretically from Loc(X) (respectively, Loc(X))b y
considering the “ 2-category (respectively, category) of objects of Loc(X) (respec-
tively, Loc(X)) equipped with a ﬁnite ´etale equivalence relation”.
(iv) Suppose that we arbitrarily choose ﬁnite ´etale structure morphisms to
X for all of the objects of Loc(X). Then every morphism Y1 →Y 2 of Loc(X)
may be written as thecomposite of an isomorphism Y1
∼
→Y 3 with a ﬁnite ´etale
morphism Y3 →Y 2 over X.
Proof. Assertions (i) and (ii) are formal consequences of Corollary 1.1.6. Asser-
tions (iii) and (iv) follow formally from the deﬁnitions. ⃝
Let X be a slim anabelioid. Then:

26 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
Deﬁnition 2.1.2.
(i) We shall say that X is a(n) (absolute) core if X is a terminal object in
Loc(X).
(ii) We shall say that X admits a(n) (absolute) core if there exists a terminal
object Z in
 Loc(X). In this case,
 Loc(X)=
 Loc(Z)=L o c (Z), so we shall say that
Z is a core.
Remark 2.1.2.1. Note that in Proposition 2.1.1, (ii), it is important to assume
that the quotients Z that one considers are slim. Indeed, if one did not impose
this condition, then by “forming quotients of slim anabelioids by the trivial actions
of ﬁnite groups”, one veriﬁes easily that the 1-category associated to the resulting
2-category never admits a terminal object — i.e., “no slim anabelioid would admit
a core”. From the point of view of anabelian varieties — e.g.,hyperbolic orbicurves
— this condition of slimness amounts to the condition that the algebraic stacks
that one works with are generically schemes (cf. [Mzk9], §2).
Remark 2.1.2.2. Note that thedeﬁnability of Loc(X),
Loc(X) is one of the most
fundamental diﬀerences between the theory of ﬁnite ´etale coverings of anabelioids
as discussed in §1.2 and the theory of ﬁnite ´etale coverings from the point of view
of “Galois categories”, as given in [SGA1]. Indeed, from the point of view of the
theory of [SGA1], it is only possible to consider “´Et(X)” — i.e., ﬁnite ´etale coverings
and morphisms that always lie over X. That is to say, in the context of the theory
of [SGA1], it is not possible to consider diagrams such as:
Z
↙↘
XY
(where the arrows are ﬁnite ´ etale) that do not necessarily lie over any speciﬁc
geometric object. We shall refer to such a diagram as a correspondenceor isogeny
between X and Y. When there exists an isogeny between X and Y,w es h a l ls a y
that X and Y are isogenous.
Next, we would like to consider universal coverings.L e t β,γ be basepoints of
a connected slim anabelioid X.W r i t e
πβ : ˜Xβ →X ; πγ : ˜Xγ →X
for the associated universal coverings (cf. the discussion of §1.2). In the following
discussion, we would also like to consider an isomorphism
ξ: ˜Xβ
∼
→ ˜Xγ
(cf. Proposition 1.2.8, (iv)).

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 27
Deﬁnition 2.1.3. We shall refer to an isomorphism ξ: ˜Xβ
∼
→ ˜Xγ as above as an
outer path from β to γ.I f ξarises from a commutative [i.e., at the coarsiﬁed level]
diagram of anabelioids
˜Xβ
ξ
−→ ˜Xγ
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
X
idX
−→ X
then we shall refer toξas an inner path from β to γ. An outer (respectively, inner)
path from β to itself will be referred to as an( ˜Xβ-valued) open (respectively, closed)
path.
Remark 2.1.3.1. Thus, inner paths are precisely the paths of [SGA1], Expos´eV ,
§7. Note that the diﬀerence between an“inner” path and an “outer” path depends
essentially on the“identity” of β, γ — i.e., what appears to be an outer path if one
thinks of β and γ as in fact being “equal” may appear to be an inner path if one
thinks of β and γ as “distinct”. Put another way:
The distinction between inner and outer paths depends essentially on the
“model of set theory” under consideration — i.e., on the labels that
one uses to describe the various sets involved in the discussion.
It is the hope of the author to pursue this point of view in more detail in a future
paper.
Remark 2.1.3.2. Note that an inner path is a special case of an outer path. The
diﬀerence between an inner path and an arbitrary outer path is easiest to analyze
when β = γ (but cf. Remark 2.1.3.1!). In this case, an ( ˜Xβ-valued) closed path is
simply an element of the fundamental group π1(X,β).
On the other hand, the motivation for the terminology “open path” is the
following. Let K be a perfect ﬁeld; L a ﬁnite Galois extension of K;a n d
 K an
algebraic closure of K.T h e n t o g i v e a
K-valued basepoint β of L is to give an
embedding ιβ : L↪ →
 K.I f w ea r et h e n g i v e n aK-linear isomorphism σ :
 K
∼
→
 K
(i.e., an element σ ∈ Gal(
K/K )), then the composite of σ with ιβ determines
another embedding ιγ : L↪ →
 K. Of course, the two basepoints β, γ of Spec(L)
deﬁned by ιβ,ιγ map to the same basepoint of Spec(K) — i.e., “if one applies the
projection Spec(L) → Spec(K), then σ becomes a closed path in Spec(K)”. This is
intended to be reminiscent of theanalogy between Galois groups in ﬁeld theory and
fundamental groups in algebraic topology (where we recall that the theory of the
latter may be formulated not just in terms of covering groups, but also in terms of
literal closed paths, i.e., topological images of the circleS1, in the space in question).
Thus, it is natural to regard σ — when working with σ as an object associated to
Spec(L) — as an open path (valued in
 K), i.e., the analogue of a topological image
of the interval [0, 2π] as opposed to the circle S1, on Spec(L).

28 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
Incidentally, this example also shows the reason for the choice of terminology
“inner/outer path”. That is to say, inner/closed paths induce (via “parallel trans-
port”) inner automorphisms of the fundamental group, while outer/open paths
arise from arbitrary (outer) automorphisms, or even isogenies, of the fundamental
group.
Proposition 2.1.4. (The Totality of Basepoints) Let X be a connected
slim anabelioid.L e t ˜X→ X be a universal covering of X, that determines
some basepoint β of X.T h e n :
(i) The subgroup
ΠX
def
= π1(X,β) = AutX ( ˜X) ⊆ Aut( ˜X) = Isog(X)
is commensurable with all of its conjugates in Isog(X). Moreover, the open
subgroups of ΠX deﬁne a basis for a topology on Isog(X) with respect to which
Isog(X) forms a Hausdorﬀ topological group . Finally, the subgroup ΠX ⊆
Isog(X) is both open and closed with respect to this topology.
(ii) Isog(X) acts transitively on the set of ˜X-valued basepoints — i.e.,
(isomorphism classes of) proﬁnite ´etale morphisms ˜X→ X —o f X. Moreover,
this action determines a bijection between the set of ˜X-valued basepoints and the
coset space:
Isog(X)/ΠX
(iii) Suppose that X is a core.T h e nΠX =I s o g (X). That is to say, X admits
precisely one ˜X-valued basepoint. In particular, all open paths onX are, in fact,
closed. Moreover, the natural functors
Et(X) → Loc(X) →
 Loc(X); ´Et(X) → Loc(X) →
 Loc(X)
are equivalences.
Proof. These assertions are all formal consequences of the deﬁnitions (cf. also
Proposition 1.2.8, (iv)). ⃝
Remark 2.1.4.1. Note, however, that the subgroup of Isog(X) generated by ΠX
and some conjugate of Π X does not necessarily contain either of these two groups
as a ﬁnite index subgroup. Perhaps the most famous example of this phenomenon
is the theorem of Ihara (cf., e.g., [Serre1], II, §1.4, Corollary 1; [Ihara]) expressing
SL2(Qp)a sa n amalgam of two copies of SL2(Zp), amalgamated along a subgroup
which is open in both copies of SL2(Zp). In the notation of the present discussion,
this example corresponds to the case
X
def
= B(SL±
2 (Zp))

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 29
(where, instead of SL2(Zp), we use its quotient SL±
2 (Zp)b y ±1 to ensure that X
is slim). Note that this example shows that Isog( X) does not necessarily admit a
natural structure of proﬁnite group . Indeed, in the case of SL±
2 (Zp), one checks
easily (by applying the theory ofp-adic Lie groups — cf., e.g., [Serre2], Chapter V,
§7) that Isog(X)= PGL2(Qp) (which is not proﬁnite).
Remark 2.1.4.2. The above example of SL2(Zp) highlights one of the major
themes of the present paper, i.e., that:
open paths ⇐⇒ Isog(X) ⇐⇒ correspondences
— that is to say, just as (in the “classical theory” of the ´etale fundamental group
given in [SGA1]) closed paths (i.e., elements of π1) correspond to elements of Π X ,
open paths corresponds to elements of Isog(X), i.e., “correspondences”.
Remark 2.1.4.3. It is interesting to note relative to Proposition 2.1.4, (ii) (cf.
also Proposition 1.2.8, (iii); Remark 2.1.3.1) that the cardinality of the collection
of basepoints Ensf →X is the same as that of the collection of proﬁnite ´etale
morphisms ˜X→ X . Indeed, both collections have the same cardinality as the
collection of morphisms Ensf → Ensf.
§2.2. Holomorphic Structures and Commensurable Terminality
In this §, we wish to discuss a relative version of the theory of §2.1. Let X, Q
be slim anabelioids.
Deﬁnition 2.2.1.
(i) A Q-holomorphic structureon X is the datum of a relatively slim morphism
(cf. Deﬁnition 1.2.9, (ii)) X→ Q , which we shall refer to as thestructure morphism.
(ii) A slim anabelioid equipped with aQ-holomorphic structure will be referred
to as a Q-anabelioid.
(iii) A Q-holomorphic morphism (or “ Q-morphism” for short) between Q-
anabelioids is a morphism of anabelioids compatible with theQ-holomorphic struc-
tures.
(iv) A Q-holomorphic structure/Q-anabelioid will be calledfaithful if its struc-
ture morphism is a π1-monomorphism.
Remark 2.2.1.1. Here, we note that the term “compatible” in Deﬁnition 2.2.1,
(iii), makes sense, precisely because of the assumption of relative slimness in Deﬁ-
nition 2.2.1, (i) (cf. Corollary 1.1.6).

30 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
Let us write
LocQ(X)
for the 2 -category whose (0-)objects Y→Q are Q-anabelioids that admit a Q-
holomorphic ﬁnite ´etale morphism Y→X to X, and whose (1-)morphisms are
arbitrary ﬁnite ´etale Q-morphisms (that do not necessarily lie over X!). Now we
have the “ Q-holomorphic analogue”of Proposition 2.1.1:
Proposition 2.2.2. (Categories of Holomorphic Localizations) Let Q be
a slim, connected anabelioid; X a Q-anabelioid.T h e n :
(i) LocQ(X) is slim. Write: LocQ(X)
def
= |LocQ(X)|.
(ii) Denote by
LocQ(X)
the 2-category whose (0-)objects Z→Q are Q-anabelioids which arise as ﬁnite
´etale quotients of objects in LocQ(X) [i.e., there exists a ﬁnite ´etale Q-morphism
Y→Z ,w h e r eY∈ Ob(LocQ(X))] and whose (1-)morphisms are ﬁnite ´etale Q-
morphisms. Then the 2-category
 LocQ(X) is slim. Write:
 LocQ(X)
def
= |
LocQ(X)|.
(iii) The 2-category
 LocQ(X) (respectively, category
LocQ(X)) may be recon-
structed entirely category-theoretically from LocQ(X) (respectively, LocQ(X))
by considering the “ 2-category (respectively, category) of objects of LocQ(X) (re-
spectively, LocQ(X)) equipped with a ﬁnite ´etale equivalence relation”.
(iv) Suppose that we arbitrarily choose ﬁnite ´etale structure morphisms to
X for all of the objects of LocQ(X). Then every morphism Y1 →Y 2 of LocQ(X)
may be written as the composite of an isomorphism Y1
∼
→Y 3 (over Q)w i t ha
ﬁnite ´etale morphism Y3 →Y 2 over X.
Let X be a Q-anabelioid. Then:
Deﬁnition 2.2.3.
(i) We shall say that X is a Q-core if X [i.e., X→ Q ] is a terminal object in
LocQ(X).
(ii) We shall say that X admits a Q-core if there exists a terminal object Z in
LocQ(X). In this case,
 LocQ(X)=
 LocQ(Z) = LocQ(Z), so we shall say that Z is
a Q-core.
Deﬁnition 2.2.4.
(i) We shall say that a closed subgroup H ⊆ G of a proﬁnite group G is
commensurably (respectively, normally) terminal if the commensurator CG(H)( r e -
spectively, normalizer NG(H)) is equal to H.

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 31
(ii) We shall say that a π1-monomorphism of anabelioids U→V is commen-
surably (respectively, normally) terminal if the image of the induced morphism
between fundamental groups of corresponding connected components of U, V is
commensurably (respectively, normally) terminal.
Remark 2.2.4.1. Thus, it is a formal consequence of the deﬁnitions that:
commensurably terminal = ⇒ normally terminal
and that
commensurably terminal with slim domain = ⇒ relatively slim
(where the “domain” is the groupH (respectively, anabelioid U) in Deﬁnition 2.2.4,
(i) (respectively, (ii))).
Proposition 2.2.5. (Commensurable Terminality and Holomorphic
Cores) Let X be a connected faithful Q-anabelioid; assume that Q is also
connected. Then X is a Q-core if and only if its structure morphism iscommen-
surably terminal.
Proof. Without loss of generality, we may writeX = B(H), Q = B(G), where H ⊆
G is a closed subgroup. First, we verify suﬃciency. By Proposition 1.1.4, it suﬃces
to prove that, ifH′ ⊆ H is an open subgroup, then any continuous homomorphism
φ : H′ → G whose image lies inH and which factors as the composite of the natural
inclusion H′ ↪→ G with conjugation by an element g ∈ G is, in fact, equal to the
to composite of the natural inclusion H′ ↪→ G with conjugation by an element
h ∈ H. But this follows immediately from Deﬁnition 2.2.4, (i), which implies that
g ∈ H. Finally, necessityfollows by reversing the preceding argument in the evident
fashion. ⃝
Let X be a connected Q-anabelioid. For simplicity, we also assume that Q
is connected. Suppose that we are given a universal covering ˜Q→Q of Q and
consider the resulting cartesian diagram:
˜Q|X −→ ˜Q
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
X− → Q
Note that Π
Q
def
=A u tQ( ˜Q) acts (compatibly) on ˜Q over Q,a sw e l la so n˜Q|X over
X. On the other hand, if we consider a connected component ˜X of ˜Q|X as an
independent geometric object,e v e ni ft h eQ-holomorphic structure on ˜X remains
ﬁxed, in general ˜X will admitdistinct (proﬁnite) ´etale morphisms toX. Put another

32 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
way, in general, X admits distinct ˜X-valued Q-holomorphic basepoints. That is to
say, we have the Q-holomorphic analogue of Proposition 2.1.4:
Proposition 2.2.6. (The Totality of Q-Holomorphic Basepoints) Let X
be a connected faithful Q-anabelioid,w h e r eQ is also connected. Let ˜Q→Q be
a universal covering of Q; ˜X→ X a connected component of ˜Q|X →X . Write
ΠQ
def
=A u tQ( ˜Q), ΠX
def
=A u tX ( ˜X ). Thus, we have a natural inclusion ΠX ⊆ ΠQ.
Then:
(i) The subgroup
ΠX =A u tX ( ˜X) ⊆ IsogQ(X)
def
=A u tQ( ˜X )= CΠQ (ΠX )
is commensurable with all of its conjugates in IsogQ(X). Moreover, the open
subgroups of ΠX deﬁne a basis for a topology on IsogQ(X) with respect to which
IsogQ(X) forms a Hausdorﬀ topological group. Finally, the subgroup ΠX ⊆
IsogQ(X) (respectively, IsogQ(X) ⊆ Isog(X)) is both open and closed (respectively,
open) with respect to this topology.
(ii) IsogQ(X) acts transitively on the set of ˜X-valued Q-holomorphic
basepoints — i.e., (isomorphism classes of) proﬁnite ´etale Q-morphisms ˜X→ X
—o f X. Moreover, this action determines a bijection between the set of ˜X-valued
Q-holomorphic basepoints and the coset space:
IsogQ(X)/ΠX
(iii) Suppose that X is a Q-core.T h e nΠX =I s o gQ(X). That is to say, X
admits precisely one ˜X-valued Q-holomorphic basepoint. In particular, all “ Q-
holomorphic” open paths onX are, in fact, closed. Moreover, the natural functors
Et(X) → LocQ(X) →
 LocQ(X); ´Et(X) → LocQ(X) →
 LocQ(X)
are equivalences.
Remark 2.2.6.1. Thus, at a more intuitive level, just as “(absolute) cores
have essentially only one basepoint”, if X is a Q-core, then every basepoint of Q
determines an essentially unique (up to renaming) Q-holomorphic basepoint of X.
Remark 2.2.6.2. The topology of Proposition 2.2.6, (i), is not to be confused
with the topology onCΠQ (ΠX ) induced by the topology of ΠQ. For instance, if ΠX
is the proﬁnite free group on 2 generators (which is easily seen to be slim —c f . ,
e.g., [Mzk8], Lemma 1.3.1) and ΠQ =A u t ( ΠX ) (which also has a natural structure
of proﬁnite group), then Π Q = CΠQ (ΠX ), but Π X is not open [i.e., relative to the
proﬁnite topology of Π Q]i nΠ Q. Here, we note that Out(Π X ) = Aut(Π X )/ΠX ,
hence also ΠQ,i s inﬁnite and slim. [Indeed, the slimness of ΠQ may be shown, for

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 33
instance, as follows: By [Tama], Theorem 0.4, applied to the projective line minus
three points over the ﬁeld of rational numbers, it follows that the centralizer of
any open subgroup of Out(ΠX ) is contained in the subgroup of Out(ΠX ) obtained
by considering the permutation group of the three points. On the other hand, by
projecting to Out(Π ab
X ) ∼= GL2(ˆZ), one sees that any element of this permutation
group that centralizes an open subgroup of GL2(ˆZ) must be trivial.]
§2.3. Quasi-Cores and Intrinsic Exhaustivity
In order to deﬁne the fundamental group of a (connected slim) anabelioid X,
it is necessary to choose a basepoint for X. As we saw in Proposition 1.2.8, this
is equivalent to choosing a universal cover ˜X→ X of X. On the other hand, in
general, there is nothing special that distinguishes a given proﬁnite ´etale ˜X→ X
from another ˜X→ X obtained from the ﬁrst by composition with some element of
Aut( ˜X ) = Isog(X). That is to say, the diﬀerence between these two ˜X→ X is a
“matter of arbitrary choices of labels”. Thus, the question naturally arises:
To what extent is it possible to construct the fundamental group of a (con-
nected slim) anabelioid in a canonical fashion that does not depend on
such arbitrary choices?
In this § and the next, we would like to analyze this issue in more detail. Our main
result (cf. Theorem 2.4.3 below) states that when the anabelioid in questionadmits
a “faithful quasi-core”(cf. Deﬁnition 2.3.1), then its fundamental group can indeed
be constructed in a rather canonical fashion. In addition to quasi-cores, we also
consider the notion of intrinsic exhaustivity, which provides a convenient, intrinsic
necessary condition for an anabelioid to admit a faithful quasi-core.
In the following, we shall always consider morphisms between anabelioids in
the coarsiﬁcation Anab of Anab.
Deﬁnition 2.3.1. Let X be a Q-anabelioid (so X, Q are slim). For simplicity,
we also assume that the fundamental group of every irreducible component ofQ is
countably (topologically) generated.
(i) We shall say that X admits (Q as) a quasi-core if the natural functor
LocQ(X) → Loc(X)
(given by forgetting the Q-holomorphic structure) is an equivalence.
(ii) We shall say that X admits (Q as) a faithful quasi-core if X admits Q as
a quasi-core, and, moreover, the Q-structure on X is faithful.
Next, let us recall that if G is a slim proﬁnite group, then it admits a natural
injection
G↪ → Isog(G)
def
= Isog(B(G))

34 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
(cf. Propositions 1.2.8, (iv); 2.1.4, (i)). Thus, in the following discussion, we shall
regard G as a subgroup of Isog(G).
Deﬁnition 2.3.2. We shall refer to as a proﬁnite subgroup K ⊆ Isog(G) a sub-
group K of theabstract groupIsog(G) which is equipped with a structure of proﬁnite
group such that the intersection K ⋂ G is a closed subgroup of both G and K
whose induced topologies from G and K coincide.
Remark 2.3.2.1. If K ⊆ Isog(G)i sa proﬁnite subgroup which is, moreover,
commensurable to a closed subgroup F ⊆ G (i.e., K ⋂ F is open in F, K), then
one veriﬁes easily that the topology on K is the unique topology with respect to
which K ⊆ Isog(G)i sa proﬁnite subgroup.
Remark 2.3.2.2. One veriﬁes immediately that if G′ ⊆ Isog(G)i sa proﬁnite
subgroup commensurable toG — so that one has a natural identiﬁcation Isog(G)=
Isog(G′) — then the proﬁnite subgroups of Isog( G)a r et h esame (relative to this
identiﬁcation) as the proﬁnite subgroups of Isog( G′).
We will also make use of the following deﬁnitions:
Deﬁnition 2.3.3.
(i) A proﬁnite group G will be called weakly intrinsically exhaustiveif for every
open subgroup H ⊆ G and every open embedding ι: H↪ → G,w eh a v e :
[G : H]=[ G : ι(H)]
(ii) A slim proﬁnite groupG will be calledintrinsically exhaustive if there exists
aﬁ l t r a t i o n
... ⊆ Gn+1 ⊆ Gn ⊆ ... ⊆ G
(where n ranges over the positive integers) of open normal subgroupsGn of G such
that ⋂
n
Gn = {1}
and, moreover, for any proﬁnite subgroup K ⊆ Isog(G) commensurable to G,t h e r e
exists an integer nK — depending only on the proﬁnite subgroup K — such that
Gn ⊆ K for n ≥ nK, and, for any open subgroup H ⊆ Gn (where n ≥ nK)a n d
any open embedding ι: H↪ → K,w eh a v eι(H) ⊆ Gn (⊆ K).
(ii) An anabelioid will be called intrinsically exhaustive (respectively, weakly
intrinsically exhaustive) if the fundamental group of every connected component of
the anabelioid is intrinsically exhaustive (respectively, weakly intrinsically exhaus-
tive).
Deﬁnition 2.3.4. Let X be a Q-anabelioid. Then we shall refer to a ﬁnite ´etale
(necessarily Galois) covering Y→X obtained as the direct summand of the pull-
back via the structure morphism X→ Q of a ﬁnite ´etale Galois covering R→Q
as Q-Galois.

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 35
Proposition 2.3.5. (Basic Properties of Quasi-Cores and Intrinsic Ex-
haustivity)
(i) Suppose that a slim anabelioid X admits a quasi-core X→ Q . Then the
natural functor
LocQ(X) →
 Loc(X)
(given by forgetting the Q-holomorphic structure) is an equivalence. Moreover, any
relatively slim composite X→ Q ′ of X→ Q with a morphism Q→Q ′ of slim
anabelioids is also a quasi-core for X.
(ii) If a slim anabelioid X admits a core X→ Q ,t h e nX→ Q is a faithful
quasi-core for X.
(iii) Suppose that X and Y are slim, connected anabelioids which are isoge-
nous.T h e nX admits a quasi-core (respectively, admits a faithful quasi-core) if
and only if Y does.
(iv) Suppose that X and Y are slim, connected anabelioids which are isoge-
nous.T h e nX is intrinsically exhaustive (respectively, weakly intrinsically exhaus-
tive) if and only if Y is.
(v) If X is intrinsically exhaustive, then it is weakly intrinsically exhaustive.
(vi) Suppose that X is weakly intrinsically exhaustive. Then there is a
unique map
degX : Ob(Loc(X)) → Q>0
such that
degX (X)=1 ; d e g (Y1/Y2)=d e gX (Y1)/degX (Y2)
for all morphisms Y1 →Y 2 of Loc(X). In particular, if Y→X is a ﬁnite ´etale
morphism of connected anabelioids of degree> 1,t h e nY is not isomorphic to X.
(vii) Let X be a slim, connected,weakly intrinsically exhaustiveanabelioid
that admits a quasi-core X→ Q .L e t
φ : Y→ X
be a connected Q-Galois covering. Then any ﬁnite ´etale (not necessarily Galois!)
morphism ψ : Y→X is abstractly equivalent (cf. §0) to φ.
(viii) If X admits afaithful quasi-core,t h e nX is intrinsically exhaustive.
In particular, if X admits a core, then X is intrinsically exhaustive.
Proof. Assertions (i), (ii), (iv), and (vi) are immediate from the deﬁnitions. As-
sertion (iii) follows from the deﬁnitions and assertion (i). Next, we verify assertion
(v). Let H ⊆ G be an open subgroup, and ι: H↪ → G be an open embedding.

36 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
Suppose that (for some large n) Gn (as in Deﬁnition 2.3.3) is contained in H,s o
ι(Gn) ⊆ Gn. Then:
∞ > [G : ι(H)] · [H : Gn]=[ G : ι(H)] · [ι(H): ι(Gn)]
=[ G : ι(Gn)] = [G : Gn] · [Gn : ι(Gn)]
≥ [G : Gn]=[ G : H] · [H : Gn]
Thus, [G : ι(H)] ≥ [G : H]. On the other hand, if we apply this inequality to
ι−1 : ι(H) ↪→ G, then we obtain the reverse inequality. This implies equality, as
desired.
Next, we turn to assertion (vii). Suppose that X→ Q is a quasi-core for X.
Without loss of generality, we may assume that X = B(G), Q = B(A), and that
X→ Q is induced by a continuous homomorphism G → A which factors:
G ↠ GA ⊆ A
If B ⊆ A is an open normal subgroup of A,a n dHA
def
= GA
⋂ B, H
def
= G ×A B,
then for any open embedding ι : H↪ → G, it follows from Deﬁnition 2.3.1, (i),
that the image of the composite of ιwith the homomorphism G → A is equal to
a · HA · a−1 (for some element a ∈ A). Thus, since B is normal in A, we conclude
that a · HA · a−1 ⊆ GA
⋂ B = HA (for some a ∈ A). On the other hand, this
implies that ιfactors through H, hence — by assertion (vi) — that ι(H)= H,a s
desired.
Finally, we turn to assertion (viii). Suppose that X→ Q is a faithful quasi-
core for X. Without loss of generality, we may assume that X = B(G), Q = B(A),
where G ⊆ A is a closed subgroup of a proﬁnite group A.L e t
... ⊆ An+1 ⊆ An ⊆ ... ⊆ A
(where n ranges over the positive integers) be a descending sequence ofopen normal
subgroups of A (which exists since A is assumed to be countably (topologically)
generated — cf. Deﬁnition 2.3.1) such that:
⋂
n
An = {1}
Let Gn
def
= G ⋂ An. Then for any proﬁnite subgroup K ⊆ Isog(G) commensurable
to G, it follows from assertion (i) that K ⋂ G ⊆ G ⊆ A extends uniquely to
an inclusion K ⊆ A.N o w t a k enK to be suﬃciently large that Gn = Kn
def
=
K ⋂ An (⊆ K), for all n ≥ nK. Then for any open subgroup H ⊆ Gn (where
n ≥ nK) and any open embedding ι: H↪ → K, it follows from Deﬁnition 2.3.1, (i),
that the composite of ιwith the inclusion K ⊆ A is induced by conjugation by an
element a ∈ A. Thus, (since An is normal in A) we obtain the desired inclusion:
ι(H)= a · H · a−1 ⊆ K
⋂
An = Kn = Gn

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 37
⃝
Remark 2.3.5.1. Thus, in words (cf. Deﬁnition 2.3.3; Proposition 2.3.5, (vi)),
weak intrinsic exhaustivity means, with respect to ﬁnite ´etale localization on B(G),
that:
The property of “being suﬃciently local as to be ﬁnite ´etale over B(G)o f
degree N”is intrinsic.
On the other hand, intrinsic exhaustivity means that:
The property of “being suﬃciently local as to be ﬁnite ´etale over B(Gn)”
is intrinsic.
Moreover, we have implications (cf. Proposition 2.3.5, (v), (viii)):
existence of a faithful quasi-core = ⇒ intrinsic exhaustivity
=⇒ weak intrinsic exhaustivity
Here, the second implicationis strict (cf. Example 2.3.7, (ii), (iii), below), but it is
not clear to the author at the time of writing to what extent the ﬁrst implication
is strict (but cf. Theorem 3.1.3, (iii); Corollary 3.1.7).
Proposition 2.3.6. (Quasi-Cores and the Group of Isogenies) Let G be a
slim proﬁnite group .
(i) Suppose that Isog(G) is proﬁnite (i.e., “ Isog(G) ⊆ Isog(G) is a proﬁnite
subgroup” — cf. Deﬁnition 2.3.2). Then B(G) →B (Isog(G)) is a quasi-core.
(ii) Suppose that G is intrinsically exhaustive;l e t{Gn} be as in Deﬁnition
2.3.3, (ii). Then the natural inclusions ... ⊆ Aut(Gn) ⊆ Aut(Gn+1) ⊆ ... ⊆
Isog(G) (where n ≥ nG) induce an isomorphism of abstract groups:
lim−→n
Aut(Gn)
∼
→ Isog(G)
(iii) Suppose that G is a closed subgroup of a slim proﬁnite group A such
that the inclusion G↪ → A is relatively slim. Then the following are equivalent:
(a) B(G) →B (A) is a faithful quasi-core.
(b) The natural inclusion CA(G) ↪→ Isog(G) is surjective.
(c) The homomorphism of abstract groups G↪ → A factors through G↪ →
Isog(G).

38 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
Proof. These assertions are all formal consequences of the deﬁnitions. ⃝
Remark 2.3.6.1. Relative to Proposition 2.3.6, (ii), we note that Aut(Gn)i sa l s o
equal to the normalizer of Gn in Isog(G). When G (hence also the Gn)i s topo-
logically ﬁnitely generated, then it follows that G admits an exhaustive descending
sequence of characteristic open subgroups... ⊆ Hm ⊆ ... ⊆ G, hence that Aut(G)
(hence also the Gn) admits a natural structure of proﬁnite group (by considering
the inverse limit of the images of Aut(G) in the various Aut(G/Hm)). On the other
hand, this proﬁnite topology on Aut( Gn) does not, in general, coincide with the
topology induced by the topology of Isog(G) discussed in Proposition 2.1.4, (i) —
cf. Remark 2.2.6.2. Moreover, (relative to Proposition 2.3.6, (ii)) the work of [TSH]
— involving inductive limits of topological groups whose inductive limit topology
(in the category of topology spaces) is not necessarily compatible with the group
structure of the inductive limit — shows that the topology of inductive limits of
topological groups can, in general, be a rather subtle issue.
Remark 2.3.6.2. The observations given in Proposition 2.3.6, (i), (iii); Remark
2.3.6.1 were related to the author by A. Tamagawa.
Example 2.3.7. Non-Intrinsically Exhaustive Proﬁnite Groups. Let p
be a prime number.
(i) Take A
def
= Zp
×, B
def
= Zp.L e t A act on B in the usual fashion. Take
G
def
= B ⋊ A. Note that G is slim. Then the open subgroup
H
def
=( p · B) ⋊ A ⊆ G
is clearly isomorphic to G, hence violates Proposition 2.3.5, (vi). Thus, G fails to
be weakly intrinsically exhaustive.
(ii) Let G
def
= PGL2(Zp). Note that G is slim.F o rm a positive integer, write
Cm ⊆ G for the subgroup determined by the matrices congruent to the identity
matrix modulo pm.T h e nG fails to be intrinsically exhaustive. Indeed, if {Gn} is
as in Deﬁnition 2.3.3, then there exist positive integers m ≥ n ≥ nG such that:
Cm ⊆ Gn ⊆ C1
Thus, for all open embeddings ι: Cm ↪→ G, we should have: ι(Cm) ⊆ C1.B u tt h i s
inclusion fails to hold if we take ιto be the embedding given by conjugation by
the matrix
( pm 0
01
)
. On the other hand, (it is an easy exercise to show that) in
this case, the unimodularity of the action by conjugation of GL2(Qp)o n M2(Qp)
implies that G is weakly intrinsically exhaustive.
(iii) For n ≥ 2, let G
def
= ˆFn,t h efree proﬁnite group on n generators.T h e nG
is slim (cf., e.g., [Naka], Corollary 1.3.4; [Mzk8], Lemma 1.3.1). Moreover, since,

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 39
for any n, m ≥ 2, ˆFn, ˆFm admit isomorphic open subgroups,i no r d e rt op r o v e
that G is not intrinsically exhaustive for all n, it suﬃces to prove that G fails to
be intrinsically exhaustive for some n (cf. Proposition 2.3.5, (iv)). On the other
hand, there exists an n such that G is isomorphic to an open subgroup of the
proﬁnite completion SL2(Z)∧ of SL2(Z). Thus, one may show that to assume the
intrinsic exhaustivity of any open subgroup of such a G leads to a contradiction
by conjugating by “Hecke operator-type matrices”— an operation which preserves
the quotient SL2(Z)∧ ↠ SL2(Zp) — as in (ii), above. Note, however, that in this
case, the Nielsen-Schreier formula (cf., e.g., [FJ], Proposition 15.25) implies that
G is weakly intrinsically exhaustive.
(iv) The anabelioid ´Et(A1
Fp ) (notation as in Example 1.1.3) associated to the
aﬃne line over Fp fails to be weakly intrinsically exhaustive. Indeed, the existence
of the ﬁnite ´etale morphism A1
Fp → A1
Fp deﬁned by
T ↦→ Tp + T
(where T is the standard coordinate on A1
Fp ) contradicts Proposition 2.3.5, (vi).
(v) If K is a ﬁnite extension of Qp, then the associated anabelioid ´Et(K)i s
weakly intrinsically exhaustive (cf., e.g., [Mzk5], Proposition 1.2), but fails to be
intrinsically exhaustive, at least when p> 2. Indeed, to see that GK (the absolute
Galois group ofK) fails to be intrinsically exhaustive, let us ﬁrst recall the following
theorem of [JR]:
Let K1, K2 be ﬁnite extensions of Qp (where p> 2) which contain the
roots of unity of order p.T h e nGK1
∼
→ GK2 if and only if [ K1 : Qp]=
[K2 : Qp]a n dK1
⋂ (Qp
ab)= K2
⋂ (Qp
ab)( w h e r eQp
ab is the maximal
abelian extension of Qp).
Now suppose that {Gn} is a sequence of open normal subgroups of GK as in Def-
inition 2.3.3, (ii). Without loss of generality (cf. Proposition 2.3.5, (iv)), we may
assume that K contains the roots of unity of order p, and that [K : Qp] ≥ 3. Let
L be the ﬁnite Galois extension of K corresponding to some Gn.W r i t eM ⊆ L
for the maximal tamely ramiﬁed subextension of L over K. By taking n to be suf-
ﬁciently large, we may assume that the extension L of M is not cyclotomic, i.e.,
that L ̸= L ⋂ (M · Qp
ab). Since [ M : Qp] ≥ [K : Qp] ≥ 3, it thus follows from
local class ﬁeld theory (cf., e.g., [Serre3]) that the wild inertia subgroup of Gab
M has
rank ≥ 3o v e rZp, hence that there exists a wildly ramiﬁed abelian extension L′ of
M such that:
[L′ : M]=[ L : M]; L′ ̸= L; L′ ⋂
(M · Qp
ab)= L
⋂
(M · Qp
ab)
Thus, (by the theorem of [JR] quoted above) we conclude that GL′
∼
→ GL = Gn
despite the fact that GL′ ̸= GL.B u tt h i scontradicts Deﬁnition 2.3.3, (ii).
Remark 2.3.7.1. Examples (iv) and (v) were related to the author by A.
Tamagawa.

40 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
§2.4. Canonical Construction of the Fundamental Group
Let X be a slim, connected anabelioid.I nt h i s§, we would like to examine the
extent to which the fundamental group of X may be constructed in a canonical
fashion, independent of a choice of basepoint.
We begin by introducing some notation. Let us write
Locbp(X)
for the category each of whose objects is an arrow U→Y ,w h e r eY is a connected
object of Loc( X), and U→ Y is a universal covering of Y (cf. Deﬁnition 1.2.7),
and whose morphisms from an arrow U1 →Y 1 to an arrow U2 →Y 2 are pairs of
arrows αU : U1
∼
→U 2, αY : Y1 →Y 2 such that the diagram
U1
αU
−→ U 2
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
Y
1
αY
−→ Y 2
commutes; αU is an isomorphism;a n dαY is ﬁnite ´etale. Thus, in particular, by
mapping U→ Y to Y,w eo b t a i nafunctor
ΦX :L o cbp(X) → Loc(X)0
— where the superscript “0” is to denote the full subcategory consisting of con-
nected objects — which (by deﬁnition) is surjective on objects.
On the other hand, if we deﬁne
SGp
to be the category whose objects are pairs (G,H ), where G is a group, and H is
a subgroup of G, and whose morphisms from (G1,H1)t o( G2,H2) are homomor-
phisms φ : G1 → G2 such that φ(H1) ⊆ H2, then we obtain a natural functor
Ψ X :L o cbp(X) → SGp
by mapping an arrow U→Y to the pair
(Aut(U),AutY(U) ⊆ Aut(U))
and a morphism fromU1 →Y 1 to U2 →Y 2 to the isomorphism Aut(U1)
∼
→ Aut(U2).
Thus:
Locbp(X) may be thought of as the“category of objects ofLoc(X) equipped
with a basepoint”and ΨX may be thought of as thestandard construction
of the fundamental group (in the presence of a basepoint).

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 41
When it is necessary tospecify the universeV relative to which we are working
— i.e., relative to which we take all of our (pro-)anabelioids (respectively, groups)
to be V -small (respectively, V -sets) — we shall write Loc V
bp(X), LocV (X) (respec-
tively, SGpV ). [Similarly, we shall write ΦV
X ,Ψ V
X
.] Thus, we observe, in particular,
that the categories LocV
bp(X), LocV (X)a r enot V -small.
Proposition 2.4.1. (Dependence of the Fundamental Group on the
Choice of Universal Covering) Let V be a universe [which is, therefore, in
particular, a “set” in some ambient model of set theory]. LetX be a V -small slim,
connected anabelioid such that the subgroup ΠX ⊆ Isog(X) (cf. Proposition 2.1.4,
(i)) is not normal. Then there exist distinct objects of LocV
bp(X) that map via
ΦV
X to the same object of LocV (X)0, but via ΨV
X to distinct objects of SGpV .I n
particular, the functor ΨV
X does not factor through ΦV
X .
Proof. Indeed, let π : ˜X→ X be a universal covering; let α ∈ Aut( ˜X)b ea n
element that does not normalize Π X
def
=A u tX ( ˜X ). Then π′ def
= π ◦α−1 is also a
universal covering of X. Moreover, we have
ΨV
X (π)=( A u t (˜X),ΠX ) ̸=Ψ V
X (π′)=( A u t (˜X),α · ΠX · α−1)
but ΦV
X (π)=Φ V
X (π′)= X. ⃝
Remark 2.4.1.1. Thus, the proof of Proposition 2.4.1 suggests, in particular,
that, in order to obtain a factorization of Ψ V
X through Φ V
X
— i.e., to obtain a
“canonical construction” of the fundamental group that does not depend on the
choice of basepoint — it is necessary to modify Ψ
V
X so that it takes values in
some sort of “quotient” in which subgroups of Aut( ˜X)a r eidentiﬁed with their
conjugates. This motivates the following discussion.
Let V , X be as in Proposition 2.4.1. Then let us denote by
SGpV
X
the category each of whose objects is an assignment A
U ↦→ AU
—w h e r eU ranges over all V -small universal coverings of X [i.e., all domains of
arrows in Locbp(X)], and AU is a collection of subgroups of Aut(U)—s u c ht h a t
for every isomorphism U1
∼
→U 2, the induced isomorphism Aut( U1)
∼
→ Aut(U2)
maps AU1 onto AU2 ; and whose morphisms Hom(A,A ′) are deﬁned as follows: The
cardinality of Hom(A,A ′)i sa l w a y s≤ 1; we take the cardinality of Hom(A,A ′)t o
be 1 if and only if the following condition is satisﬁed: for every U,e v e r yH ∈ AU ,
there exists an H′ ∈ A′
U such that H ⊆ H′. Note that this category SGpV
X is not
V -small.

42 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
Thus, we obtain a natural functor
˜ΞV
X :L o cV
bp(X) → SGpV
X
by mapping an arrowU→Y to the assignment that maps a universal coveringV to
the conjugacy class of subgroupsof Aut(V) determined by the subgroup AutY(U) ⊆
Aut(U) and an isomorphism Aut(U)
∼
→ Aut(V) which is induced by an isomorphism
U
∼
→V . [Note that this conjugacy class is independent of the choice of isomorphism
U
∼
→V .] Moreover, it is evident from the deﬁnition of ˜ΞV
X that:
Theorem 2.4.2. (Canonical Fundamental Groups up to Isogeny) Let V ,
X be as in Proposition 2.4.1. Then there exists a functor
ΞV
X :L o cV (X)0 → SGpV
X
such that ΞV
X = ˜ΞV
X ◦ΦV
X .
Remark 2.4.2.1. Thus, the functor of Theorem 2.4.2 yields afunctorial [i.e., with
respect to ﬁnite ´etale coverings] construction of the fundamental group as a group
of transformations of some geometric object [i.e., the universal covering], albeit up
to a certain indeterminacy, given by the action of Isog(X). On the other hand,
this functor has the drawback that it only constructs the fundamental group as an
“abstract group”, i.e., not as a proﬁnite group , as one might ideally wish.
Now let us assume that X is a connected Q-anabelioid. For simplicity, we
assume that Q is also connected. In the following discussion, we would like to show
that (certain quotients) of the fundamental group of X may be constructed in a
very canonicalfashion complete with theirproﬁnite structure, under theassumption
that X→ Q is a quasi-core for X.
First, let us choose an explicit system of ﬁnite ´etale Galois coverings
... →Q n+1 →Q n → ... →Q
of Q which, when regarded as a pro-anabelioid Q∞ , forms a universal covering of
Q.F o re a c hn, choose a coherent system of connected components
Xn ↪→Q n|X
of Qn|X (cf. the proof of Proposition 2.3.5, (viii)). This system thus deﬁnes a
pro-anabelioid X∞ , together with a morphism X∞ →Q ∞ .
Now observe that, since X→ Q is a quasi-core, it follows that any automor-
phism α : Xn
∼
→X n necessarily lies over Q, hence that the natural morphism
Xn →Q n

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 43
[obtained by composing the inclusionXn ↪→Q n|X with the projection Qn|X →Q n]
is preserved by composition on the the left with arbitrary automorphisms of Xn,
up to the action of a (unique) element of Gal( Qn/Q)
def
=A u tQ(Qn). That is to
say, there is a unique element αQn ∈ Gal(Qn/Q) for which the following diagram
commutes:
Xn →Q n
⏐⏐
↓
α
⏐
⏐
↓
αQn
Xn →Q n
Moreover, the uniqueness of this element implies that the assignmentα ↦→ αQn is a
homomorphism. Thus, in summary, we see that we obtain anouter homomorphism
ρAut
n :A u t (Xn) → Gal(Qn/Q)
which isentirely determined(as an outer homomorphism) by theisomorphism class
of Xn. In particular, restricting to Gal( Xn/X) ⊆ Aut(Xn), we obtain an outer
homomorphism
ρGal
n : Gal(Xn/X) → Gal(Qn/Q)
which is entirely determined (as an outer homomorphism) by the abstract equiv-
alence class of the morphism Xn →X , hence, in particular, by the isomorphism
class of X plus the covering Qn →Q (since X→ Q is a quasi-core).
Since the above construction is clearly “functorial inn”, by passing to the limit
over n, we thus obtain an outer homomorphism
ρGal
∞ : Gal(X∞ /X) → ΠQ
def
= Gal(Q∞ /Q)
whose image is entirely determined (up to conjugacy) by the isomorphism class of
X. Let us denote this image (well-deﬁned up to conjugacy) by:
ΠX/Q ⊆ ΠQ
Moreover, since the above construction is determined entirely by the isomorphism
class of X, it follows (cf. Proposition 2.1.1, (iv)) that the assignment X ↦→ ΠX/Q
is functorial with respect to ﬁnite ´etale coverings X1 →X 2 of connected objects of
Loc(X) in the sense that such a covering induces an inclusion
ΠX1/Q ⊆ ΠX2/Q (⊆ ΠQ)
which is well-deﬁned up to conjugation by elements of ΠQ. (That is to say, one
allows an indeterminacy with respect to distinguishing between, say, a given inclu-
sion Π X1/Q ⊆ ΠX2/Q and some other inclusion Π X1/Q ⊆ π · ΠX2/Q · π−1,w h e r e
π ∈ ΠQ.)
If G is a Hausdorﬀ topological group, then let us write
Sub(G)

44 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
for the category whose objects are conjugacy classes of closed subgroups H ⊆ G,
and whose morphisms H → H′ are inclusions of H into a (conjugate of) H′.T h a t
is to say, the cardinality of the set of morphisms between two objects of Sub(G)i s
either 0 or 1.
Then the above discussion may be summarized as follows:
Theorem 2.4.3. (Canonically Constructed Fundamental Groups via
Quasi-Cores) Let Q be a slim, connected anabelioid. Suppose thatX is a connected
Q-anabelioid for which X→ Q is a quasi-core. Then there is a functor
Loc(X)0 → Sub(ΠQ)
Y ↦→{ ΠY/Q ⊆ ΠQ}
such that B(ΠY/Q) is isomorphic to the image of Y in Q (cf. Deﬁnition 1.1.7). In
particular, if X→ Q is a faithful quasi-core,t h e nY ∼= B(ΠY/Q).
Remark 2.4.3.1. Thus, Theorem 2.4.3 yields a canonical construction of
the fundamental group of a slim, connected X which admits a faithful quasi-core
Q. Moreover, this construction has the virtue that it is compatible [cf. the above
discussion!] with the proﬁnite structure of the fundamental group of X.T h a ti s
to say, more concretely:
The functor of Theorem 2.4.3 may be written as an inverse limit of a
compatible system of functors to the categories
Sub(ΠQ/Hn)
where ... ⊆ Hn ⊆ ... ⊆ ΠQ is an exhaustive descending sequence of open
normal subgroups of ΠQ.
This compatibility with the proﬁnite structure is closely related to the the intrin-
sicity of “knowing how local one is” (cf. Remark 2.3.5.1).
On the other hand, one drawback of the construction of Theorem 2.4.3 is that
it depends on the arbitrary choice of a universal covering Q∞ →Q for Q as an
“input datum”. This motivates the following deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 2.4.4. Let X be a slim, connected anabelioid. Then we shall refer to
a closed subgroup Δ ⊆ ΠX , considered as a subgroup of Isog( X), as an intrinsic
proﬁnite subgroup if it is topologically ﬁnitely generated, normal in Isog( X), and,
moreover, the continuous inclusion of Hausdorﬀ topological groups Δ ↪→ Isog(X)
is relatively slim.
Remark 2.4.4.1. Note that since Δ is topologically ﬁnitely generated, it follows
(cf. Remark 2.3.6.1) that Aut(Δ) has a natural structure of proﬁnite group.

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 45
Proposition 2.4.5. (The Faithful Quasi-Core Associated to an Intrinsic
Proﬁnite Subgroup) Let Δ ⊆ Isog(X) be an intrinsic proﬁnite subgroup .
Then the action by conjugation of ΠX on Δ yields a morphism
X ∼= B(ΠX ) →B (Aut(Δ))
which is a faithful quasi-core for X.
Proof. Indeed, this is a formal consequence of Proposition 2.3.6, (iii), (a)⇐⇒ (c).
⃝
Remark 2.4.5.1. Thus, when the quasi-core of Theorem 2.4.3 is obtained as in
Proposition 2.4.5, one can replace the functor of Theorem 2.4.3 by afunctor in the
style of Proposition 2.4.2: That is to say, instead of considering a conjugacy class
of subgroups of a particular proﬁnite group ΠQ, we observe that for any universal
covering U,w eo b t a i nanatural proﬁnite subgroup
Δ U ⊆ Aut(U)
(determined by conjugating Δ by some isomorphism U
∼
→ ˜X of U to the universal
covering ˜X used to deﬁne Isog( X)) such that any isomorphism U1
∼
→U 2 maps Δ U1
to Δ U2. In particular, we obtain an assignment
U ↦→A U
def
= Aut(Δ U )
which is functorial in isomorphisms U1
∼
→U 2. Then instead of obtaining a con-
jugacy class of subgroups [as in Theorem 2.4.3] in a particular Π Q,w eo b t a i na
conjugacy class of subgroups of AU ,f o re a c hU, which is compatible with all iso-
morphisms U1
∼
→U 2. [We leave the routine details to the reader.] At any rate, this
yields a construction of the canonical fundamental groups of Theorem 2.4.3 which
is independent of the choice of any universal covering of Q.

46 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
Section 3: Anabelioids Arising from Hyperbolic Curves
§3.1. Anabelioid-Theoretic Interpretation of Scheme-Theoretic Cores
In the following discussion, we wish to translate the scheme-theoretic theory
of cores in the context of hyperbolic curves (cf. [Mzk9], §2) into the language
of anabelioids (cf. the proﬁnite group-theoretic approach to such a translation
given in [Mzk9], §2). The main technical tool that will enable us to do this is the
“Grothendieck Conjecture”— i.e., Theorem A of [Mzk6].
For i =1 ,2, let Fi be either Q or Qpi (for some prime number pi). Let Ki be a
ﬁnite extension of Fi.L e t( Xi)Ki be a hyperbolic orbicurve over Ki. Assume that
we have chosen basepoints of the ( Xi)Ki , which thus induce basepoints/algebraic
closures
 Ki of theKi and determinefundamental groupsΠ(Xi)Ki
def
= π1((Xi)Ki )a n d
Galois groups GKi
def
= Gal(
Ki/Ki). Thus, for i =1 ,2, we have an exact sequence:
1 → Δ Xi → Π(Xi)Ki
→ GKi → 1
(where Δ Xi ⊆ Π(Xi)Ki
is deﬁned so as to make the sequence exact). Here, we
shall think of GKi as a quotient of Π(Xi)Ki
(i.e., not as an independent group to
which Π(Xi)Ki
happens to surject). One knows (cf. [Mzk8], Lemma 1.3.8) that this
quotient Π(Xi)Ki
→ GKi is an intrinsic invariant of the proﬁnite group Π (Xi)Ki
.
Next, we would like to introduce anabelioids into our discussion. Write:
Xi
def
= ´Et((Xi)Ki ); Si
def
= ´Et(Ki)
Note that Xi, Si are slim (cf. [Mzk8], Theorem 1.1.1, (ii); [Mzk8], Lemma 1.3.1),
and that the structure morphisms Xi →S i are relatively slim (cf. [Mzk8], Theorem
1.1.1, (ii)). Thus, we may think of Xi as an Si-anabelioid (cf. §2.2). In particular,
we may consider the categories
LocSi (Xi);
 LocSi (Xi)
of §2.2. In the following discussion, we shall work with anabelioids“at the coarsiﬁed
level”[i.e., in Anab].
Corollary 3.1.1. (Anabelioid-Theoretic Preservation of Arithmetic
Quotients) Any ﬁnite ´etale morphism
α : X1 →X 2
induces a commutative diagram
X1
α
−→ X 2
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
S
1
αS
−→ S 2

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 47
(where the horizontal morphisms are ﬁnite ´etale), hence pull-back
LocS2 (X2) → LocS1 (X2 ×S2 S1);
 LocS2 (X2) →
 LocS1 (X2 ×S2 S1)
and extension functors
LocS1 (X1) ↪→ LocS1 (X2 ×S2 S1);
 LocS1 (X1)
∼
→
 LocS1 (X2 ×S2 S1)
which are equivalences wheneverα is an isomorphism. Here, the extension functor
on “ Loc(−)’s” (respectively, “
Loc(−)’s”) is a full embedding (respectively, equiva-
lence).
Proof. Indeed, this is a formal consequence of [Mzk8], Lemma 1.3.8 (and Propo-
sition 2.2.2, (iv)). ⃝
Theorem 3.1.2. (Anabelioid-Theoreticity of Correspondences) Let K
be a ﬁnite extension of Qp or Q; XK a hyperbolic orbicurve over K; write
X
def
= ´Et(XK), S
def
= ´Et(K). Then the natural functor
LocK(XK) −→ LocS(X)
Z ↦→ ´Et(Z)
(deﬁned by applying “ ´Et(−)”) is an equivalence of categories. A similar asser-
tion holds for “ Loc(−)” replaced by “
Loc(−)”. In particular, XK is (respectively,
admits) a K-core if and only if X is (respectively, admits) an S-core.
Proof. Since “
 Loc(−)” may be categorically reconstructed from “Loc( −)” via
the same recipe for both schemes and anabelioids, it suﬃces to prove the asserted
equivalence in the case of “Loc( −)”.
In this case, it is immediate from the deﬁnitions that the functor in question is
essentially surjective. It follows from the injectivity of [Mzk6], Theorem A (cf. also
Proposition 1.1.4) that this functor is faithful. Thus, it suﬃces to prove that this
functor is full. Since “fullness” follows from Proposition 1.2.5, (ii), for morphisms
over X, it suﬃces (by Proposition 2.2.2, (iv)) to prove that every S-isomorphism
Y
∼
→Z
(where Y, Z are anabelioids representing objects of Loc S(X)) arises from a mor-
phism of schemes in LocK(XK). But this is a formal consequence of [Mzk6], The-
orem A (cf. also Proposition 1.1.4). ⃝
Theorem 3.1.3. (Absolute Cores over Number Fields) Let K be a num-
ber ﬁeld ; XK a hyperbolic orbicurve over K; write X
def
= ´Et(XK).T h e n :

48 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
(i) XK is an [absolute] core if and only if XK is a K-core, and, moreover,K
is a minimal ﬁeld of deﬁnition for XK.
(ii) Applying “ ´Et(−)” induces an equivalence of categories:
Loc(XK)
∼
→ Loc(X)
In particular, X is (respectively, admits) an [absolute] core if and only if XK is
(respectively, admits) an [absolute] core.
(iii) Suppose that XK is non-proper.T h e nX admits a core if and only if
it is intrinsically exhaustive.
Proof. Assertion (i) follows formally from [Mzk9], Deﬁnition 2.1 and [Mzk9],
Remark 2.1.1. Assertion (ii) follows, in light of [Mzk8], Theorem 1.1.3, by the same
argument as that used to prove Theorem 3.1.2. To prove assertion (iii), let us recall
from the theory of [Mzk3] (cf. [Mzk9], Remark 2.1.2) that X
K [or, equivalently, by
assertion (ii), X] fails to admit a core if and only if XK is isogenous to a Shimura
curve.S i n c eXK is assumed to be non-proper, this Shimura curve may be taken to
be the moduli stack of hemi-elliptic curves (cf. [Take], p. 396, second paragraph).
Thus, if XK fails to admit a core, one may show that X fails to be intrinsically
exhaustive by using Hecke correspondences on the moduli stack of hemi-elliptic
curves, as in Example 2.3.7, (ii), (iii) (cf. Proposition 2.3.5, (iv)). On the other
hand, if X admits a core, then it follows from Proposition 2.3.5, (ii), (viii), that X
is intrinsically exhaustive. ⃝
Remark 3.1.3.1. One expects that the assumption that XK be non-proper in
Theorem 3.1.3, (iii), is inessential. We made this assumption only to technically
simplify the proof that X fails to be intrinsically exhaustive (when it is assumed
to fail to admit a core). The point of Theorem 3.1.3, (iii), was to give an example
where the existence of a core is equivalent to intrinsic exhaustivity (cf. Remark
2.3.5.1), since this contrasts with the situation that occurs in the p-adic case (cf.
Remark 3.1.6.1, Corollary 3.1.7 below).
Corollary 3.1.4. (Anabelioid-Theoreticity of Cores) Let
α : X
1 →X 2
be a ﬁnite ´etale morphism. Then:
(i) α induces — in a fashionfunctorial with respect toα — a pull-back functor
LocK2 ((X2)K2 ) →
 LocK1 ((X1)K1 )
which is an equivalence whenever S1 →S 2 is an isomorphism, and is equal to
the usual scheme-theoretic pull-back functor whenever α arises from a ﬁnite ´etale
morphism of schemes (X1)K1 → (X2)K2 .

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 49
(ii) (X1)K1 is K1-arithmetic if and only if (X2)K2 is K2-arithmetic. Simi-
larly, if X1 →X 2 ×S2 S1 is an isomorphism, then (X1)K1 is a K1-core if and only
if (X2)K2 is a K2-core.
(iii) If a ﬁnite ´etale morphism (X2)K2 → (Z2)K2 to a K2-core (Z2)K2 maps
(via the functor of (i)) to a ﬁnite ´etale morphism (X1)K1 → (Z1)K1 ,t h e n(Z1)K1
is a K1-core, and, moreover, the morphism X1 →X 2 ×S2 S1 extends uniquely
to a commutative diagram:
X1 →X 2 ×S2 S1 →X 2
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
Z
1
∼
→Z 2 ×S2 S1 →Z 2
(where Zi
def
= ´Et((Zi)Ki ), and the lower horizontal arrow on the left is an isomor-
phism).
Proof. The functor of (i) is obtained by composing the pull-back functor on
“
 Loc(−)’s” of Corollary 3.1.1 with an inverse to the extension functor on “
Loc(−)’s”
of Corollary 3.1.1 (which is an equivalence), and then applying the equivalences of
Theorem 3.1.2 to the domain and codomain of this composite. Assertion (ii) is a
formal consequence of assertion (i); [Mzk9], Deﬁnition 2.1; [Mzk9], Remark 2.1.1;
and [Mzk9], Proposition 2.3, (i). To prove assertion (iii), we may assume, for sim-
plicity, (cf. Proposition 2.1.1, (iv)) thatS
1 →S 2 is anisomorphism. Then it follows
that the pull-back functor on “
Loc(−)’s” of (i) is anequivalence:
LocK2 ((X2)K2 )
∼
→
 LocK1 ((X1)K1 )
Thus, the existence of an extension as in assertion (iii) follows formally by think-
ing of Xi, Zi as subcategories of
 LocKi ((Xi)Ki ) (cf. Proposition 1.2.5, (ii)). The
uniqueness of such an extension is a formal consequence of the slimness of Zi. ⃝
Proposition 3.1.5. (Absolute Degrees) For i =1 ,2, set:
degarith(Xi)
def
=[ Ki : Fi]
and deggeo(Xi) equal to the Euler characteristic of (Xi)Ki . [That is to say,
if (Xi)Ki is a hyperbolic curve of type (gi,ri),t h e nw es e tdeggeo(Xi) equal to
2gi−2+ri; more generally, if(Xi)Ki is only an orbicurve, then we take itsdeggeo(−)
to be thedeggeo(−) of some degreed ﬁnite ´etale covering of(Xi)Ki which is a curve,
divided by d.] Then for any ﬁnite ´etale morphism α : X1 →X 2 (which thus induces
a commutative diagram as in Corollary 3.1.1), we have:
deggeo(X1)=d e ggeo(X2)·(deg(α)/deg(αS)); deg arith(X1)=d e garith(X2)·deg(αS)
In particular, Xi is weakly intrinsically exhaustive. We shall refer todeggeo(Xi)
(respectively, degarith(Xi))a st h e absolute geometric (respectively, absolute
arithmetic) degree of Xi.

50 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
Proof. Indeed, this follows from [Mzk8], Lemma 1.3.9, (for theabsolute geometric
degree) and [Mzk8], Proposition 1.2.1, (i), (v) (for the absolute arithmetic degree).
⃝
Remark 3.1.5.1. Proposition 3.1.5 already suggests the possibility that, under
the further assumption that ( Xi)Ki admits a Ki-core, Xi should admit a faithful
quasi-core. In the remainder of the present §, we shall show that this is, in fact, the
case (at least when (Xi)Ki is non-proper) — cf. Theorem 3.1.6 below. In light of
Proposition 2.3.5, (ii); Theorem 3.1.3, (ii), this fact is primarily of interest in the
case where Ki is a p-adic local ﬁeld (although we shall not assume this to be the
case in the following discussion).
In the following discussion, we would like to assume that:
(a) The hyperbolic orbicurve ( Xi)Ki admits a Ki-core (Zi)Ki (where i =
1,2).
(b) The anabelioids X1, X2 are isogenous.
Choose basepoints for (Zi)Ki , so that we obtain, for i =1 ,2, exact sequences:
1 → Δ Zi → Π(Zi)Ki
→ GKi → 1
Write Zi
def
= ´Et((Zi)Ki ). Then assumptions (a), (b); Corollary 3.1.4, (iii); and
[Mzk8], Lemma 1.3.9, imply that ( Z1)K1 ,( Z2)K2 are hyperbolic orbicurves of the
same type (g,⃗r). Let us choose once and for all a model
ˆΠg,⃗r
of the geometric fundamental group of a hyperbolic orbicurve of type(g,⃗r) (in char-
acteristic 0). To simplify notation, in the following discussion, we shall simply write
ˆΠf o r ˆΠg,⃗r.
Thus, we have (noncanonical) isomorphisms ˆΠ ∼= Δ Zi . Such isomorphisms
induce an outer homomorphism Π(Zi)Ki
→ Aut(ˆΠ) which is independent (as an
outer homomorphism) of the choice of such isomorphism and, moreover, ﬁts into a
commutative diagram:
1 −→ Δ Xi −→ Π(Xi)Ki
−→ GKi −→ 1
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
1 −→ Δ
Zi −→ Π(Zi)Ki
−→ GKi −→ 1
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
1 −→ ˆΠ −→ Aut( ˆΠ) −→ Out(ˆΠ) −→ 1

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 51
Here, we observe that the vertical arrows between the ﬁrst and second lines are al-
ways injective.I f ,m o r e o v e r ,(Xi)Ki is non-proper, then the vertical arrowsbetween
the second and third linesare also injective (by the theory of [Mtmo] — cf. [Mzk8],
Theorem 1.3.6). If we then set
Zcom
def
= B(Aut(ˆΠ)) →M com
def
= B(Out(ˆΠ))
— i.e., we wish to think of Zcom →M com as a sort of “universal combinatorial
model” of Zi →S i — then we obtain a commutative diagram of connected slim
anabelioids
Xi −→ Z i −→ Z com
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
S
i
id
−→ S i −→ M com
in which the horizontal arrows are allrelatively slim(cf. [Mzk8], Theorem 1.1.1, (ii);
[Mzk8], Lemma 1.3.1; [Mzk6], Theorem A). Next, let us observe that the intrinsic
nature of the anabelioid associated to a geometric core (cf. Corollary 3.1.4, (iii))
implies that the morphism Xi →Z com is functorial with respect to arbitrary ﬁnite
´etale morphisms X1 →X 2.
Finally, let us observe that Aut( ˆΠ) (hence also Out( ˆΠ)) is countably (topo-
logically) generated. Indeed, to show this, it suﬃces to show the existence of a
descending sequence of open subgroups
... ⊆ An+1 ⊆ An ⊆ ... ⊆ Aut(ˆΠ)
such that ⋂
n An = {1}. To this end, let us note that ˆΠa d m i t sadescending
sequence of open characteristic subgroups
... ⊆ ˆΠ[n +1 ] ⊆ ˆΠ[n] ⊆ ... ⊆ Aut( ˆΠ)
such that ⋂
n ˆΠ[n]= {1}. Thus, if we set
An
def
=K e r ( A u t (ˆΠ) → Aut(ˆΠ/ ˆΠ[n]))
we obtain a sequence {An} with the desired properties.
Thus, in summary, we see that we have proven (most of) the following:
Theorem 3.1.6. (The Quasi-Core Associated to a Geometric Core) Let
K be a ﬁnite extension of Qp or Q; XK a hyperbolic orbicurve over K which
admits a K-core ZK of type (g,⃗r). Write:
X
def
= ´Et(XK); Z
def
= ´Et(ZK); Zcom
def
= B(Aut(ˆΠg,⃗r)); Mcom
def
= B(Out(ˆΠg,⃗r))
Then:

52 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
(i) ZK determines a Zcom-holomorphic structure X→ Z com on X which is a
quasi-core for X. In particular, the theory of §2.3, 2.4 may be applied to X.
(ii) If XK is non-proper, then this quasi-core is faithful and, moreover,
obtained as the quasi-core associated to an intrinsic proﬁnite subgroup (cf.
Proposition 2.4.5). Finally, if K is a number ﬁeld which is a minimal ﬁeld of
deﬁnition for ZK, then the morphism Z→Z com is commensurably terminal.
Proof. It remains only to observe that the ﬁnal part of (ii) is a formal consequence
of Theorem 3.1.3, (i), (ii); Proposition 2.2.5. ⃝
Remark 3.1.6.1. In the case of p-adic local ﬁelds, one does not expect Z
def
=
´Et(ZK)t ob ea core (even if K is a minimal extension of Qp over which ZK is
deﬁned). Nevertheless, Theorem 3.1.6 shows that Z has the interesting property
of being “closer to being a core”than, for instance, PGL2(Qp) (cf. Example 2.3.7,
(ii), (iii); Theorem 3.1.3, (iii); Corollary 3.1.7 below).
Remark 3.1.6.2. Our use of [Mzk8], Theorem 1.3.6 [i.e., the main result of
[Mtmo]] in the above construction of a faithful quasi-core — which (by the the-
ory of §2.4) allows us to construct “canonical fundamental groups”, i.e., to assign
canonical names, or labels (up to conjugacy) to the elements of the funda-
mental group — is reminiscent of the essential idea lying behind the theory of
the Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller group, which applies this same injectivity to assign
canonical names (up to conjugacy) to the elements of G
Q. It is interesting to
note, however, that although this theory of the Grothendieck-Teichm¨ uller group
is typically applied to analyzing GQ, in fact, (by the “Neukirch-Uchida Theorem”
— cf., e.g., [Mzk8], Theorem 1.1.3) the elements of GQ already possess intrinsic,
canonically determined names (up to conjugacy). Thus, the ability to assign
canonically determined names has much greater signiﬁcance in the case of p-adic
local ﬁelds.
Remark 3.1.6.3. Relative to Remark 3.1.6.2, it is also interesting to note that,
just as the theory of §2.4 only applies in the case where the curve in question
admits a geometric core, the theory of the Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller group centers
around considering not just the projective line minus three points — a curve which
fails to admit a geometric core — but instead a certain system of moduli stacks
of hyperbolic curves, which includes, for instance, the moduli stack of hyperbolic
curves of type (0,5) which (by [Mzk3], Theorem C) does admit a geometric core.
Finally, we have the following analogue of Theorem 3.1.3, (iii), which is valid
in the local p-adic case as well:
Corollary 3.1.7. (Criteria for the Existence of a Geometric Core) Let
K be a ﬁnite extension of Qp or Q; XK a non-proper hyperbolic orbicurve
over K; write X
def
= ´Et(XK). Then the following assertions are equivalent:

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 53
(i) XK admits a K-core.
(ii) X admits a faithful quasi-core.
(iii) X is intrinsically exhaustive.
Proof. This is a formal consequence of Theorem 3.1.6, (i), (ii); Proposition 2.3.5,
(viii); and the existence of Hecke correspondences(cf. the proof of Theorem 3.1.3,
(iii)) when XK does not admit a K-core. ⃝
Remark 3.1.7.1. The implication (i) =⇒ (iii) of Corollary 3.1.7 (in the p-adic
case) is somewhatsurprising in light of Example 2.3.7, (v). That is to say, Corollary
3.1.7 implies that (whenXK admits a K-core) the rigidity of ´Et(XK)i s suﬃciently
strong to eliminate the non-intrinsic exhaustivity of ´Et(K). In particular, we con-
clude in this case that the natural inclusion
COut(Δ Z)(GK) ↪→ Isog(GK)
fails to be surjective (cf. Propositions 2.3.5, (viii); 2.3.6, (iii)).
§3.2. The Logarithmic Special Fiber via Quasi-Cores
In this §, we interpret the results of [Mzk8], §2, from the point of view of the
theory of quasi-cores —c f . §2.3, 2.4.
Let XK be a hyperbolic curveover a ﬁnite extension K of Qp.D e n o t et h ering
of integers (respectively, residue ﬁeld )o f K by OK (respectively, k); also we shall
use notation such as “klog”, “(klog)∼ ”, as in [Mzk8], §2.
Assume that XK admits a stable model over OK (cf. [Mzk8], §2), as well as
a K-core ZK,a n dt h a tXK is Galois over ZK.T h e nw edeﬁne the stable model of
ZK to be the quotient — in the sense of [log] stacks — of the stable model of XK
by Gal(XK/ZK). Let us denote the logarithmic special ﬁbers of the stable models
of XK, ZK by Xlog
k , Zlog
k , respectively. Write:
X
def
= ´Et(XK); Z
def
= ´Et(ZK)
Also, let us write Zcom for the quasi-core (for X, Z) of Theorem 3.1.6.
Now recall from [Mzk8], the discussion following Remark 2.5.3, the“universal
admissible covering”
˜Xlog
k → Xlog
k
of Xlog
k determined by theadmissible quotient ΠXK ↠ Πadm
XK . Put another way, this
covering is the composite of all admissible coverings (cf. [Mzk4], §3) of Xlog
k ×klog

54 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
(klog)∼ . In the following discussion, let us denote the category of (disjoint unions
of coverings isomorphic to) subcoverings of this universal admissible covering (re-
spectively, subcoverings of the “geometric universal admissible covering” ˜Xlog
k →
Xlog
k ×klog (klog)∼ )b y :
´Etadm(Xlog
k ) (respectively, ´Etadm(Xlog
k ×klog (klog)∼ ))
To keep the notation simple, we set:
X0
def
= ´Etadm(Xlog
k );
 X0
def
= ´Etadm(Xlog
k ×klog (klog)∼ )
[so the fundamental group of X0 (respectively,
 X0) may be identiﬁed with Π adm
XK
(respectively, the geometric portion Δadm
XK ⊆ Πadm
XK of Πadm
X
K — cf. [Mzk8], §2)].
Similarly, we may construct
Z0
def
= ´Etadm(Zlog
k )
[for instance, as the quotient of X0 by the faithful action on X0 of the ﬁnite group
Gal(XK/ZK)].
Next, let us write
Q0
for the “anabelioid quotient” of
 X0 by the natural action on
 X0 by the proﬁnite
group
Aut(Xlog
k ×klog (klog)∼ )
[i.e., the group of automorphisms of the abstract log scheme which do not neces-
sarily lie over klog or (klog)∼ !]. That is to say, at the level of proﬁnite groups ,
the fundamental group of the anabelioid Q0 is the extension of the proﬁnite group
Aut(Xlog
k ×klog (klog)∼ )b yt h e[slim! — cf. [Mzk8], Lemma 2.2, (i)] fundamental
group of
 X0 determined by the natural outer action of the former proﬁnite group
on the latter. Note that by the deﬁnition of “Aut”, the slimness of
 X0,a n dt h e
slimness of Gal((klog)∼ /klog) [cf. [Mzk8], Proposition 1.2.3, (iii)], it follows thatQ0
is also slim.
Thus, we have a commutative diagram of naturalrelatively slim morphisms of
slim, connected anabelioids
X→ Z
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
X
0 →Z 0 →Q 0
in which the horizontal morphisms are all ﬁnite ´etale.

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 55
Theorem 3.2.1. (The Admissible Quotient as Quasi-Core) Assume that
X→ Z is Zcom-Galois. Then the morphism
X→ Q 0
is a quasi-core. In particular, the theory of §2.3, 2.4 may be applied to this
morphism.
Proof. By the functoriality of the anabelioid associated to a geometric core [(cf.
Corollary 3.1.4, (iii)] and our hypothesis that X→ Z is Zcom-Galois [cf. Proposi-
tion 2.3.5, (vii)], it follows that it suﬃces to consider, for K′ a ﬁnite extension of
K, the behavior of automorphisms of the quotient
(ΠX ⊇)Π XK′ ↠ Πadm
XK′ (⊆ ΠX0 )
induced by arbitrary automorphisms of ΠXK′ . By [Mzk8], Theorem 2.7, it follows
that such automorphisms of Π adm
XK′ necessarily arise from automorphisms of the
logarithmic special ﬁber of XK′ . Thus, we conclude by the deﬁnition of Q0 and the
easily veriﬁed fact that base-change to totally wildly ramiﬁed extensions K′′ of K′
does not aﬀect the automorphism group of the logarithmic special ﬁber. ⃝
Remark 3.2.1.1. Note that the anabelian nature of the logarithmic special ﬁber
(i.e., [Mzk8], Theorem 2.7) is applied in Theorem 3.2.1 in a fashion similar to the
way in which theanabelian nature of hyperbolic curves over number ﬁeldsis applied
in Theorem 3.1.3, (ii).

56 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI*
Bibliography
Unpublished RIMS preprints are available as .ps ﬁles at:
http://www.kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp/∼ kenkyubu/paper/all.html
[DM] P. Deligne and D. Mumford, The Irreducibility of the Moduli Space of Curves
of Given Genus, IHES Publ. Math. 36 (1969), pp. 75-109.
[FC] G. Faltings and C.-L. Chai,Degenerations of Abelian Varieties, Springer-Verlag
(1990).
[ F J ] M .F r i e da n dM .J a r d e n ,Field Arithmetic, Springer-Verlag (1986).
[Groth] A. Grothendieck, Letter to G. Faltings (June 1983) in Lochak, L. Schneps,Geo-
metric Galois Actions; 1. Around Grothendieck’s Esquisse d’un Programme ,
London Math. Soc. Lect. Note Ser. 242, Cambridge Univ. Press (1997).
[Ihara] Y. Ihara, On discrete subgroups of the two by two projective linear group over
p-adic ﬁelds, J. Math. Soc. Japan 18 (1966), pp. 219-235.
[JR] M. Jarden and J. Ritter, On the characterization of local ﬁelds by their absolute
Galois groups, J. Number Theory 11 (1979), pp. 1-13.
[John1] P. T. Johnstone, P. T,Topos theory, London Mathematical Society Monographs
10, Academic Press (1977).
[John2] P. T. Johnstone, How general is a generalized space?, Aspects of topology,
London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser. 93, Cambridge Univ. Press (1985), pp.
77-111.
[Knud] F. F. Knudsen, The Projectivity of the Moduli Space of Stable Curves, II,
Math. Scand. 52 (1983), 161-199.
[McLn1] S. MacLane, One Universe as a Foundation for Category Theory,Reports of the
Midwest Category Seminar III, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 106, Springer-
Verlag (1969).
[McLn2] S. MacLane, Categories for the working mathematician (Second edition), Grad-
uate Texts in Mathematics 5, Springer-Verlag (1998).
[McLr] C. McLarty, Elementary Categories, Elementary Toposes, Oxford Logic Guides
21, Oxford University Press (1992).
[Mtmo] M. Matsumoto, Galois representations on proﬁnite braid groups on curves, J.
Reine Angew. Math. 474 (1996), pp. 169-219.
[Mzk1] S. Mochizuki, The Hodge-Arakelov Theory of Elliptic Curves: Global Discretiza-
tion of Local Hodge Theories, RIMS Preprint Nos. 1255, 1256 (October 1999).
[Mzk2] S. Mochizuki, The Galois-Theoretic Kodaira-Spencer Morphism of an Elliptic
Curve, RIMS Preprint No. 1287 (July 2000).

THE GEOMETR Y OF ANABELIOIDS 57
[Mzk3] S. Mochizuki, Correspondences on Hyperbolic Curves, Journ. Pure Appl. Al-
gebra 131 (1998), pp. 227-244.
[Mzk4] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of the Compactiﬁcation of the Hurwitz Scheme,
Publ. of RIMS 31 (1995), pp. 355-441.
[Mzk5] S. Mochizuki, A Version of the Grothendieck Conjecture forp-adic Local Fields,
The International Journal of Math. 8 (1997), pp. 499-506.
[Mzk6] S. Mochizuki, The Local Pro-p Anabelian Geometry of Curves, Invent. Math.
138 (1999), pp. 319-423.
[Mzk7] S. Mochizuki, Anabelian geometry in the Hodge-Arakelov theory of elliptic
curves, Communications in arithmetic fundamental groups (Kyoto, 1999/2001),
S¯urikaisekikenky¯usho K¯oky¯uroku 1267 (2002), pp. 96-111.
[Mzk8] S. Mochizuki, The Absolute Anabelian Geometry of Hyperbolic Curves,Galois
Theory and Modular Forms, Kluwer Academic Publishers (2003), pp. 77-122.
[Mzk9] S. Mochizuki, The Absolute Anabelian Geometry of Canonical Curves, RIMS
Preprint 1379, October 2002.
[Naka] H. Nakamura, Galois rigidity of pure sphere braid groups and proﬁnite calculus,
J. Math. Sci. Univ. Tokyo 1 (1994), pp. 71-136.
[Serre1] J.-P. Serre, Trees, Springer-Verlag (1980).
[Serre2] J.-P. Serre, Lie Algebras and Lie Groups, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1500,
Springer-Verlag (1992).
[Serre3] J.-P. Serre, Local Class Field Theoryin Algebraic Number Theory , ed. J.W.S.
Cassels and A. Fr¨ohlich, Academic Press (1967).
[SGA1] Revˆetement ´etales et groupe fondamental,S ´eminaire de G´eometrie Alg´ebrique
du Bois Marie 1960-1961 (SGA1), dirig´e par A. Grothendieck, augment´ed e
deux expos´es de M. Raynaud, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 224, Springer-
Verlag (1971).
[Take] K. Takeuchi, Arithmetic Fuchsian Groups with Signature (1;e), Journ. Math.
Soc. Japan 35 (1983), pp. 381-407.
[Tama] A. Tamagawa, The Grothendieck Conjecture for Aﬃne Curves, Compositio
Math. 109 (1997), pp. 135-194.
[TSH] N. Tatsuuma, H. Shimomura, T. Hirai, On group topologies and unitary rep-
resentations of inductive limits of topological groups and the case of the group
of diﬀeomorphisms, J. Math. Kyoto Univ. 38 (1998), pp. 551-578.