COMMENTS ON “THE ´ET ALE THET A FUNCTION AND
ITS FROBENIOID-THEORETIC MANIFEST A TIONS”
Shinichi Mochizuki
March 2022
(i) The ﬁrst sentence of Deﬁnition 3.1, (ii) [i.e., the deﬁnition of the term“log-
meromorphic”], should be replaced by the following text:
A log-meromorphic functionon Zlog
∞ is deﬁned to be a nonzero meromor-
phic functionf on Zlog
∞ such for everyN ∈N≥1, it holds thatf admits an
N-th rootover some tempered covering ofZlog. [Thus, it follows immedi-
ately, by considering the ramiﬁcation divisors of such tempered coverings
that arise from extracting roots off, that the divisor of zeroes and poles
of f is alog-divisor.]
That is to say, the class of meromorphic functions that are “log-meromorphic”
in the sense of this modiﬁed deﬁnition is contained in the class of meromorphic
functions that are “log-meromorphic” in the sense of the original deﬁnition. In
light of the content of this modiﬁed deﬁnition, perhaps a better term for this class
of meromorphic functions would be“tempered-meromorphic”.
(ii) In order to understand the relationship between the modiﬁed deﬁnition of (i)
and the original deﬁnition, it is useful to consider the following conditions on a
nonzero meromorphic functionf on Zlog
∞ :
(a) For every N ∈ N≥1, it holds that f admits an N-th root over some
tempered covering ofZlog.
(b) For everyN ∈N≥1 which isprime top, it holds thatf admits anN-th
rootover some tempered covering ofZlog.
(c) The divisor of zeroes and poles off is alog-divisor.
Thus, (a) is the condition of the modiﬁed deﬁnition of (i); (c) is the condition of
the original deﬁnition. It is immediate that (a) implies (b). Moreover, [cf. (i)]
one veriﬁes immediately, by considering the ramiﬁcation divisors of the tempered
coverings that arise from extracting roots of f, that (b) implies (c). When N
is prime to p,i f f satisﬁes (c), then it follows immediately from the theory of
admissible coverings[cf., e.g., [1],§2, §8] that there exists aﬁnite log ´etale covering
Ylog → Zlog whose pull-backYlog
∞ → Zlog
∞ to Zlog
∞ is suﬃcient
(R1) to annihilate all ramiﬁcation over the cusps or special ﬁber ofZlog
∞ that
might arise from extracting anN-th root off,a sw e l la s
Typeset by AMS-TEX
1

2 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(R2) to split all extensions of the function ﬁelds of irreducible components of
the special ﬁber ofZlog
∞ that might arise from extracting anN-th root of
f.
That is to say, in this situation, it follows thatf admits an N-root over the tem-
pered covering ofZlog given by the “universal combinatorial covering” ofYlog.I n
particular, it follows that (c) implies (b). Thus, in summary, we have:
(a) =⇒ (b) ⇐⇒ (c).
On the other hand, unfortunately, it is not clear to the author at the time of writing
whether or not (c) [or (b)] implies (a).
(iii) Observe that it follows from the theory of§1 [cf., especially, Proposition 1.3]
that thetheta function that forms the main topic of interest of the present paper
satisﬁes condition (a). Indeed, the only instance occurring in the remainder of
the text where the modiﬁed deﬁnition of (i) makes a diﬀerence is the proof of
Proposition 4.2, (iii). That is to say, in this proof, it is necessary to use property
(a) of (ii) [i.e., as opposed to just properties (b) or (c)]. Thus, this situation is
remedied [without any aﬀect on the remainder of the text] by taking property (a)
to be the deﬁnition of “log-meromorphic”. The author apologizes for any confusion
caused by this oversight on his part.
(iv) An alternative approach to the approach of (i) above [i.e., of modifying the
deﬁnition of the term“log-meromorphic”] is the following. One may leave Deﬁnition
3.1, (ii), unchanged, if one modiﬁes Deﬁnition 4.1, (i), by assuming further that
the meromorphic function “f ∈O×(Abirat)” ofloc. cit. satisﬁes the following
“Frobenioid-theoretic version” of condition (a):
(d) For every N ∈N≥1, there exists a linear morphismA′ → A in C such
that the pull-back off to A′ admits anN-th root.
[Here, we recall that, as discussed in (iii), the Frobenioid-theoretic theta functions
that appear in the present paper satisfy (d).] Note that since the rational function
monoid of the FrobenioidC, as well as the linear morphisms ofC,a r ecategory-
theoretic [cf. [2], Theorem 3.4, (iii), (v); [2], Corollary 4.10], this condition (d) is
category-theoretic. Thus, if one modiﬁes Deﬁnition 4.1, (i), in this way, then the
remainder of the text goes through without change, except that one must replace
the reference to the deﬁnition of “log-meromorphic” [i.e., Deﬁnition 3.1, (ii)] that
occurs in the proof of Proposition 4.2, (iii), by a reference to condition (d) [i.e., in
the modiﬁed version of Deﬁnition 4.1, (i)].
(v) In the discussion preceding Deﬁnition 2.1, one must in fact assume that the
integer l is oddin order for the quotientΔX to bewell-deﬁned. Since, ultimately, in
the present paper [cf. the discussion following Remark 5.7.1], this is the only case
that is of interest, this oversight does not aﬀect the bulk of the remainder of the
present paper. Indeed, the only places where the case ofeven l is used are Remark
2.2.1 and the application of Remark 2.2.1 in the proof of Proposition 2.12 for the
orbicurves “˙C”. Thus, Remark 2.2.1 must bedeleted; in Proposition 2.12, one must
in fact exclude the case where the orbicurve under consideration is “˙C”. On the

COMMENTS ON “THE ´ETALE THETA FUNCTION” 3
other hand, this theory involving Proposition 2.12 [cf., especially, Corollaries 2.18,
2.19] is only appliedafter the discussion following Remark 5.7.1, i.e., which only
treats the curves “X”. That is to say, ultimately, in the present paper, one is only
interested in the curves “X”, whose treatment only requires the case ofodd l.
(vi) The phrase “theunique value ∈O×
K” in the ﬁrst line of Deﬁnition 1.9, (ii),
should read “theunique value ∈K×”.
(vii) The following text should be added after the second paragraph of§1:
Let Tlog be the formal log scheme obtained byp-adically completingthe log
scheme deﬁned by equipping the spectrum of the ring of integers of a ﬁnite
extension of Qp with the log structure determined by the closed point.
In the discussion to follow concerning various formal schemes that are
Zariski locally isomorphic to the underlying formal scheme of some stable
log curve overT
log [for varyingTlog], we shall frequently have occasion to
work with“divisors”on such formal schemes. Such “divisors” are to be
understood in the following sense: Aneﬀective Cartier divisoris a formal
closed subscheme that is deﬁned by a coherent sheaf of idealsI which is
an invertible sheaf. Aneﬀective divisoris a formal closed subscheme that
is deﬁned by a coherent sheaf of idealsI w h i c hi sa ni n v e r t i b l es h e a fa w a y
from the nodes of the special ﬁber and, moreover, satisﬁes the following
condition at each nodeν:i fw ew r i t eˆO for the completion of the structure
sheaf of the formal scheme under consideration atν, I· ˆO for the ideal of
ˆO generated byI,a n dm ⊆ ˆO for the maximal ideal ofˆO,t h e nV(I· ˆO) ⊆
Spec( ˆO) is the schematic closure of an eﬀective divisor [in the usual sense!]
on the one-dimensional regular scheme Spec(ˆO) \{ m}. A [not necessarily
eﬀective]divisor is a fractional ideal of the formI·J −1,w h e r eI is a
coherent sheaf of ideals that determines an eﬀective divisor, andJ is a
coherent sheaf of ideals that determines an eﬀective Cartier divisor; ifI
may also be taken to be a coherent sheaf of ideals that determines an
eﬀective Cartier divisor, then we shall say that the divisor given by the
fractional idealI·J −1 is Cartier.
(viii) In the discussion following the proof of Proposition 1.1, the notation log(qX)
is to be understood as a formal symbol which is used in situations in which we
wish to write the multiplication operation on the multiplicative monoid of regular
functions to whichqX belongs additively.
(ix) In the ﬁnal sentence of Remark 1.10.4, (i), the phrase “divisor zeroes” should
read “divisor of zeroes”.
(x) In Proposition 1.5, (i), (ii), the three instances of the notation “Δtp
(−))ell/ΔΘ”,
where “(−)” is eitherY or ¨Y, should be replaced by the notation “Δtp
(−))Θ/ΔΘ”.
(xi) In Proposition 5.2, (iii), the phrase “bi-KummerN-th root of theN-th root of
(i)” should read “bi-KummerN-th root of (i)”.

4 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(xii) The phrase “a ...-multiple” should be replaced by the phrase “an ...-multiple”
in the second paragraph of the proof of Theorem 1.6 [one instance]; the discussion
following Remark 2.6.1 [two instances].
(xiii) In the discussion following Remark 2.6.1, the phrase “determines a class”
should be replaced by the phrase “arises from a class”.
(xiv) In the ﬁrst display of Corollary 2.18, (ii), the notation “(l·ΔΘ)” should read
“(l·Δ•
Θ)”.
(xv) In the discussion of Example 3.9, (iii), the various “perf-saturations”that
occur may be replaced simply by“perfections”. That is to say, the notion of “perf-
saturation in a monoid that isalready perfect”i se n t i r e l yequivalent to the usual
notion of the “perfection” of a monoid. In particular, although there isno inaccu-
racy in the description of the relevant monoids as “perf-saturations”, the notion of
a “perf-saturation” [which is not applied elsewhere in the present paper] is, in fact,
unnecessaryin the present paper.
(xvi) In Deﬁnition 3.3, (i), (c), the assertion that “iH ∈I is necessarily unique” is
false, in general. Theintended assertionhere is the assertion [which is immediate
from the deﬁnitions involved!] that “Δﬁl,∞
iH ⊆H is necessarily unique”. Moreover,
this uniqueness of Δﬁl,∞
iH is entirelysuﬃcient, from the point of view of concluding
that the notion of the “Δﬁl-closure ofH in Δ” iswell-deﬁned.
(xvii) In Proposition 1.3; Proposition 1.4, (iii); Theorem 1.6, (iii); Remark 1.6.4, the
notation “∈” applied to collections of cohomology classes should, strictly speaking,
be a “⊆”.
(xviii) In the explanation immediately following the display of Proposition 1.5,
(iii), it should also have been noted that the notation “log(¨U)” is used to denote
the Kummer class, writtenadditively, of the meromorphic function¨U on ¨Y.
(xix) In the discussion immediately following the display of the paragraph immedi-
ately preceding Deﬁnition 2.13, the slightly rough explanation constituted by the
phrase
“of K× on Πtp
Y [μN], which induces ... and the kernel of this quotient.”
should be replaced by the following more precise description:
“of K× on Πtp
Y [μN]; that is to say, each outer automorphism in the im-
age ofK× lifts to an automorphism of Πtp
Y [μN] that induces the identity
automorphism of both the quotient Πtp
Y [μN] ↠ Πtp
Y and the kernel of this
quotient.”
(xx) Strictly speaking, the deﬁnition of the monoid “Φell
W” given in Example 3.9,
(iii), leads to certain technical diﬃculties, which are, in fact,entirely irrelevantto

COMMENTS ON “THE ´ETALE THETA FUNCTION” 5
the theory of the present paper. These technical diﬃculties may be averted by
making the following slight modiﬁcations to the text of Example 3.9, as follows:
(xx-1) In the discussion following the ﬁrst display of Example 3.9, (i), the phrase
“Ylog is ofgenus 1” should be replaced by the phrase “Ylog is ofgenus 1
and has eitherprecisely one cuspor precisely two cuspswhose diﬀerence
is a 2-torsion element of the underlying elliptic curve”.
(xx-2) In the discussion following the ﬁrst display of Example 3.9, (i), the phrase
the lower arrow of the diagram to be “˙X
log
→ ˙C
log
”
should be replaced by the phrase
the lower arrow of the diagram to be “˙Xlog → ˙Clog”.
(xx-3) In the discussion following the ﬁrst display of Example 3.9, (ii), the
phrase “unramiﬁed over the cuspsof ...” should be replaced by the phrase
“unramiﬁed over the cuspsas well asover the generic pointsof the irre-
ducible components of the special ﬁbers of the stable models of ...”. Also,
the phrase “tempered coverings of the underlying ...” should be replaced
by the phrase “tempered admissible coverings of the underlying ...”.
In a word, the thrust of both the original text and the slight modiﬁcations just
discussed is that the monoid “Φell
W” is to be deﬁned to be just large enough to
include precisely those divisors which are necessary in order to treat the theta
functions that appear in the present paper.
(xxi) In the second paragraph of§1, it should have been mentioned explicitly that
X denotes theunderlying formal schemeof the formal log schemeXlog. In a similar
vein, in the third paragraph of§1, it should have been mentioned explicitly thatX
denotes theunderlying schemeof the log schemeXlog.
(xxii) In the ﬁnal sentence of Remark 2.6.1, the phrase “by taken” should read “by
taking”.
(xxiii) In Remark 2.18.2, the phrase “this may” should read “that may”.
(xxiv) In Corollary 2.19, (ii), the notation “αM : MM
∼
→ MM ” should read “αM :
MM
∼
→ M•
M”.
(xxv) In the discussion preceding Deﬁnition 3.3, the phrase “of thep-adic comple-
tion” should read “on thep-adic completion”.
(xxvi) In Remark 3.6.4, the phrase “of a tempered Frobenioids” should read “of a
tempered Frobenioid”.
(xxvii) In the ﬁrst paragraph of§4, the phrase
“bi-Kummer theory”theory developed here
should read as follows:
“bi-Kummer theory”developed here

6 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(xxviii) In the ﬁrst paragraph of the proof of Proposition 4.3, the phrase “the fact
the monoid” should read “the fact that the monoid”.
(xxix) In Remark 5.12.2, the phrase “given given collection” should read “given
collection”; the phrase “the fact there is” should read “the fact that there is”.
(xxx) Concerning theclassical theory of theta functions on Tate curves,s o m er e a d -
ers have remarked that the exposition that may be found in “[Mumf], pp. 306-307”
is not suﬃciently detailed. One reader has remarked in this context that he found
the exposition given in [3], Chapter I,§2, and [3], Chapter II,§5, to be helpful.
(xxxi) In Proposition 1.3, the text “whose restriction to ... Moreover,” surrounding
the third to last display should read as follows:
whose restriction
H
1(ΔΘ, 1
2ΔΘ) = Hom(ΔΘ, 1
2ΔΘ)
to ΔΘ ⊆(Δtp
Y )Θ ⊆(Πtp
Y )Θ is given by the natural inclusionΔΘ ↪→ 1
2ΔΘ.
Moreover,
(xxxii) In the second display of Corollary 2.19, (iii), the notation “H1(¨Y,(l·ΔΘ))”
should read as follows:
H1(Πtp
¨Y ,(l·ΔΘ))
(xxxiii) We remark that in the paragraph preceding Corollary 2.9, the“labels”
referred to in the phrase
“we thus obtain labels∈Z for the cusps of¨Y
log
”
should be understood as consisting of somemap — i.e., from the set of cusps of
¨Y
log
to Z —w h i c hi snot necessarily injective!
(xxxiv) In Theorem 3.7, (ii), the phrase “SupposeD” should read “Suppose that
D”.
(xxxv) In Proposition 2.4, it should also have been stated that the notation “¨Ylog
□ ”
is used to denote the covering associated to the curve “Xlog
□ ” of Proposition 2.4 as
in the discussion of§1 [i.e., the discussion preceding Lemma 1.2, applied in the case
where “Xlog” is taken to be the “Xlog
□ ” of Proposition 2.4].
(xxxvi) At the beginning of the proof of Lemma 2.17, the phrase “a set of generators
of H” should read “a set of free generators of [the free discrete group]H”.
(xxxvii) In the explanation immediately following the ﬁrst display of Deﬁnition
2.10, the phrase “cyclotomic envelope” should read “[mod N] cyclotomic envelope”.
(xxxviii) In the ﬁrst sentence of Deﬁnition 2.13, (ii), “folows” should read “follows”.

COMMENTS ON “THE ´ETALE THETA FUNCTION” 7
(xxxix) In Remark 2.18.2, the phrase “appears as an object this may” should read
“appears as an object that may”.
(xl) In Deﬁnition 3.3, (ii), the phrase “Zlog
∞ → Zlog corresponds to the subgroup
Δﬁl,∞
i ⊆Δtp
X” should read “the coveringsZlog
∞ → Zlog → Xlog correspond to the
ﬁltration of subgroups Δﬁl,∞
i ⊆Δﬁl
i ⊆Δtp
X”.
(xli) In Example 3.9, (i), it should be noted that the “Xlog”a n d“Ylog” of Example
3.9 diﬀerfrom the “Xlog”a n d“Ylog”o f§1, §2.
(xlii) The following sentence should be inserted immediately following the ﬁrst
sentence of Example 3.9, (iii):
[Here, we note that one veriﬁes immediately [cf. the discussion of Deﬁni-
tion 3.3, (i), (ii)] that there exists a tempered ﬁlter onYlog.]
(xliii) In the ﬁrst paragraph of the proof of Proposition 4.3, the phrase “together
with the fact the monoid” should read “together with the fact that the monoid”.
(xliv) The following sentence [is, in fact,implicit, but, for the sake of clarity] could
be inserted at the beginning of the discussion immediately following Remark 2.6.1:
In the following discussion, we assume that the hypotheses onK and l
made at the beginning of Deﬁnition 2.5 are in force, i.e., thatl is odd,
that K is aﬁnite extension of Qp of odd residue characteristic,a n dt h a t
K = ¨K.
(xlv) The data that constitutes thethird and [when it exists]fourth member(s)of
the collection of data used to specify themodel mono- and bi-theta environmentsin
the ﬁrst sentence of Proposition 2.14, (iii), and the ﬁfth display of Corollary 2.18 is
a section[i.e., as opposed to a “μN-conjugacy class of subgroups determined by the
image of a section”, as stipulated in Deﬁnition 2.13, (ii), (c), and Deﬁnition 2.13,
(iii), (c), (d)]. Thus, in order for this sort of collection of data to conform to the
requirements of the deﬁnition of a model mono- or bi-theta environment, one should
understand the notation of thesesectionsas a sort ofshorthand for the phrase “the
μN-conjugacy class of subgroups determined by the image of the section ...”.
(xlvi) With regard to the notation “X
def
= X ×OK K”a n d“Y
def
= Y×OK K”t h a t
appears in the second and ﬁfth paragraphs of§1, we note the following: These
objects X andY aredeﬁnedasthe ringed spacesobtainedbytensoringthestructure
sheaves ofX and Y overOK with K. Thus, if, for instance,Y is the formal scheme
obtained as the formal inverse limit of an inverse system of schemes
...↪ → Yn ↪→ Yn+1 ↪→ ...
—w h e r en ranges over the positive integers, and each “↪→” is a nilpotent thickening
—a n dU is an aﬃne open of thecommon underlying topological space of theYn,

8 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
then the rings of sections of the respective structure sheavesOY, OY of Y, Y over
U are, by deﬁnition, given as follows:
OY(U)
def
= lim←−n
OYn(U); OY (U)
def
= OY(U)⊗OK K.
Here, we observe thatOY(U)i st h ep-adic completionof anormal noetherian ring
of ﬁnite type overOK. In particular, we observe that one may considerﬁnite ´etale
coverings of Y, i.e., by considering systems of ﬁnite ´etale algebras AU over the
various OY (U) [that is to say, asU is allowed to vary over the aﬃne opens of
the Yn] equipped withgluings over the intersections of the variousU that appear.
Note, moreover, that by considering thenormalizations of the OY(U)i n AU,w e
conclude [cf. the discussion of the Remark immediately following Theorem 2.6 in
S e c t i o nI Io f[ 4 ] ]t h a t
(NorFor) any such system {AU}U may be obtained as theW
def
= W ×OK K for
some formal scheme W that isﬁnite over Y, and that arises as theformal
inverse limitof an inverse system of schemes
...↪ → Wn ↪→ Wn+1 ↪→ ...
—w h e r en ranges over the positive integers; each “↪→” is a nilpotent
thickening; for each aﬃne openV of thecommon underlying topological
space of theWn, OW(V)i st h ep-adic completionof anormal noetherian
ring of ﬁnite type overOK.
Indeed, this follows from well-known considerations in commutative algebra, which
we review as follows. Let R be a normal noetherian ring of ﬁnite type over a
complete discrete valuation ringA [i.e., such asOK in the above discussion] with
maximal ideal mA and quotient ﬁeld F such that R is separated in the mA-adic
topology. Thus, since A is excellent [cf. [5], Scholie 7.8.3, (iii)], it follows [cf. [5],
Scholie 7.8.3, (ii)] thatR is excellent, hence that themA-adic completion ˆR of R is
also normal [cf. [5], Scholie 7.8.3, (v)]. Then it is well-known and easily veriﬁed [by
applying a well-known argument involving thetrace map] that thenormalization
of ˆR in any ﬁnite ´etale algebra over ˆR ⊗A F is a ﬁnite algebra over ˆR.L e t ˆS be
such aﬁnite algebra over ˆR. Then it follows immediately from a suitable version
of “Hensel’s Lemma”[cf., e.g., the argument of [6], Lemma 2.1] that ˆS may be
obtained, as the notation suggests, as themA-adic completion of aﬁnite algebra
S over R, which may in fact be assumed to beseparatedin the mA-adic topology
and [by replacingS by its normalization and applying [5], Scholie 7.8.3, (v), (vi)]
normal.L e tf ∈R be an element that maps to anon-nilpotentelement ofR/mA·R.
WriteRf
def
= R[f−1]; Sf
def
= S⊗RRf; ˆRf, ˆSf for the respectivemA-adic completions
of Rf, Sf. Then it follows again from [5], Scholie 7.8.3, (v), thatˆSf,w h i c hm a y
be naturally identiﬁed [sinceS is aﬁnite algebraover R]w i t hˆS ⊗ˆR
ˆRf,i snormal.
That is to say, it follows immediately that
(NorForZar) the operation of formingnormalizations [i.e., as in the above discussion]
is compatiblewith Zariski localizationon thegiven formal scheme.
On the other hand, one veriﬁes immediately that (NorFor) follows formally from
(NorForZar).

COMMENTS ON “THE ´ETALE THETA FUNCTION” 9
Bibliography
[1] S. Mochizuki, The Proﬁnite Grothendieck Conjecture for Closed Hyperbolic
Curves over Number Fields,J. Math. Sci. Univ. Tokyo3 (1996), pp. 571-627.
[2] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of Frobenioids I: The General Theory,Kyushu J.
Math. 62 (2008), pp. 293-400.
[3] A. Robert,Elliptic curves. Notes from postgraduate lectures given in Lausanne
1971/72, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 326, Springer-Verlag (1973).
[4] G. Faltings, Crystalline Cohomology and p-adic Galois Representations,Pro-
ceedings of the First JAMI Conference, Johns Hopkins Univ. Press (1990), pp.
25-79.
[5] A. Grothendieck and J. Dieudonn´e, ´El´ements de g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique IV,
´Etude locale des sch´emas et des morphismes de sch´emas, S´econde partie,Publ.
Math. IHES 24 (1965).
[6] S.Mochizuki,TopicsinAbsoluteAnabelianGeometryII:DecompositionGroups
and Endomorphisms,J. Math. Sci. Univ. Tokyo20 (2013), pp. 171-269.