Title:  Inter -universal Teichmüller Theory as an Anabelian Gateway to Diophantine Geometry and Analytic Number 
Theory 
 
Speaker:  Shinichi Mochizuki (RIMS, Kyoto University)  
 
Abstract: 
One question that is frequently asked concerning inter-universal Teichmüller theory (IUT) is the following: 
 
Why/how does IUT allow one to apply anabelian geometry to prove diophantine results? 
 
In this talk, we address this question from various points of view.  First, we discuss the fundamental framework 
underlying the relationship established by IUT between anabelian geometry, on the one hand, and diophantine 
geometry/analytic number theory, on the other.  This discussion centers around the N -th power map on a subring of a 
field and the difference between regarding a group as a Galois group and as an abstract group that is not equipped with 
an embedding into the automorphism group of a field.  Here, we emphasize that this discussion is entirely elementary  
and only assumes a knowledge of groups/monoids, rings, fields , and the elementary geometry surrounding the 
projective line/Riemann sphere.  We then proceed to survey recent developments (work in progress) in IUT, namely, 
the Galois-orbit version of IUT, which has new applications to the Section Conjecture (in anabelian geometry) and the 
nonexistence of Siegel zeroes of certain Dirichlet L-functions.  The application to the Section Conjecture is interesting 
in that it exhibits and reconfirms the essentially anabelian content of IUT, i.e., as a theory based on anabelian geometry 
that is applied to prove new results in anabelian geometry.  On the other hand, these recent applications, taken together 
with the original application of IUT to the ABC/Szpiro/V ojta Conjectures, are also noteworthy in that they may be 
regarded as a striking example of Poincaré's famous quote to the effect that 
 
“mathematics is the art of giving the same name to different things”. 
 
That is to say , the common name “IUT”  that may be regarded as describing, in essence, a single mathematical 
phenomenon that manifests itself, depending on relatively inessential (!) differences of context, as various (at first 
glance, unrelated!) diverse phenomena in anabelian geometry, diophantine geometry, and analytic number theory .  
The relationship with Poincaré's famous quote is also fascinating  in that it was apparently motivated by various 
mathematical observations on the part of Poincaré concerning the similarities between transformat ion group 
symmetries of modular functions such as theta functions and symmetry groups of the hyperbolic geometry of the upper 
half-plane --- all of which are topics (cf. the discussion above of Galois groups versus abstract groups!) that bear a 
profound relationship to IUT. 