TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III:
GLOBAL RECONSTRUCTION ALGORITHMS
Shinichi Mochizuki
November 2015
Abstract. In the present paper, which forms the third part of a three-part series
on an algorithmic approach to absolute anabelian geometry , we apply the ab-
solute anabelian technique ofBelyi cuspidalization developed in the second part,
together with certain ideas contained in an earlier paper of the author concerning the
category-theoretic representation of holomorphic structures via either the topologi-
cal group SL
2(R) or the use of “parallelograms, rectangles, and squares”, to develop
a certain global formalism for certain hyperbolic orbicurves related to a once-
punctured elliptic curve over a number ﬁeld. This formalism allows one to construct
certain canonical rigid integral structures ,w h i c hw er e f e rt oa slog-shells, that
are obtained by applying thelogarithm at various primes of a number ﬁeld. More-
over, although each of these local logarithms is “far from being an isomorphism” both
in the sense that itfails to respect the ring structures involved and in the sense [cf.
Frobenius morphisms in positive characteristic!] that it has the eﬀect of exhibiting
the “mass” represented by its domain as a“somewhat smaller collection of mass”
than the “mass” represented by its codomain, this global formalism allows one to
treat the logarithm operation as aglobal operation on a number ﬁeld which satisﬁes
the property of being an “isomomorphism up to an appropriate renormal-
ization operation” , in a fashion that is reminiscent of the isomorphism induced
on diﬀerentials by a Frobenius lifting,once one divides by p. More generally, if one
thinks of number ﬁelds as corresponding to positive characteristic hyperbolic curves
and of once-punctured elliptic curves on a number ﬁeld as corresponding tonilpotent
ordinary indigenous bundles on a positive characteristic hyperbolic curve, then many
aspects of the theory developed in the present paper are reminiscent of [the positive
characteristic portion of] p-adic Teichm¨uller theory.
Contents:
Introduction
§0. Notations and Conventions
§1. Galois-theoretic Reconstruction Algorithms
§2. Archimedean Reconstruction Algorithms
§3. Nonarchimedean Log-Frobenius Compatibility
§4. Archimedean Log-Frobenius Compatibility
§5. Global Log-Frobenius Compatibility
Appendix: Complements on Complex Multiplication
2000 Mathematical Subject Classiﬁcation. Primary 14H30; Secondary 14H25.
Typeset by AMS-TEX
1

2 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Introduction
§I1. Summary of Main Results
§I2. Fundamental Naive Questions Concerning Anabelian Geometry
§I3. Dismantling the Two Combinatorial Dimensions of a Ring
§I4. Mono-anabelian Log-Frobenius Compatibility
§I5. Analogy withp-adic Teichm¨uller Theory
Acknowledgements
§I1. Summary of Main Results
Let k be a ﬁnite extension of the ﬁeldQp of p-adic numbers [for p ap r i m e
number]; k an algebraic closure ofk; Gk
def
= Gal(k/k). Then the starting point of
the theory of the present paper lies in theelementary observation that although
the p-adic logarithm
logk : k
×
→k
[normalized so that p ↦→0] is not a ring homomorphism, it does satisfy the
important property of beingGalois-equivariant[i.e., Gk-equivariant].
In a similar vein, if F is an algebraic closure of a number ﬁeld F, GF
def
=
Gal(F/F ), and k, k arise, respectively, as the completions ofF, F at a nonar-
chimedean prime ofF, then although the map logk does not extend,i na n yn a t u r a l
w a y ,t oam a pF
×
→F [cf. Remark 5.4.1], it does extend to the“disjoint union
of the logk’s at all the nonarchimedean primes ofF”in a fashion that isGalois-
equivariant [i.e., GF-equivariant] with respect to the natural action ofGF on the
resulting disjoint unions of the variousk
×
⊆k.
Contemplation of the elementary observations made above led the author to
the following point of view:
The fundamental geometric frameworkin which the logarithm operation
should be understood isnotthe ring-theoretic framework of scheme theory,
but rather a geometric framework based solely on theabstract proﬁnite
groups Gk, GF [i.e., the Galois groups involved], i.e., a framework which
satisﬁes the key property of being“immune”to the operation of applying
the logarithm.
Such a group-theoretic geometric framework is precisely what is furnished by the
enhancement of absolute anabelian geometry— which we shall refer to asmono-
anabelian geometry — that is developed in the present paper.
This enhancement may be thought of as a natural outgrowth of thealgorithm-
based approachto absolute anabelian geometry, which forms the unifying theme [cf.
the Introductions to [Mzk20], [Mzk21]] of the three-part series of which the present
paper constitutes the third, and ﬁnal, part. From the point of view of the present
paper, certain portions of the theory and results developed in earlier papers of the
present series — most notably, the theory ofBelyi cuspidalizations developed in

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 3
[Mzk21],§3 — are relevant to the theory of the present paper partly because of their
logical necessityin the proofs, and partly because of theirphilosophical relevance
[cf., especially, the discussion of“hidden endomorphisms”in the Introduction to
[Mzk21]; the theory of [Mzk21],§2].
Note that a ring may be thought of as a mathematical object that consists
of “two combinatorial dimensions”, corresponding to its additive structure,
which we shall denote by the symbol ⊞,a n di t smultiplicative structure,w h i c h
we shall denote by the symbol⊠ [cf. Remark 5.6.1, (i), for more details]. One
way to understand the failure of the logarithm to be compatible with the ring
structures involved is as a manifestation of the fact that the logarithm has the
eﬀect of“tinkering with, or dismantling, this two-dimensional structure”. Such
a dismantling operation cannot be understood within the framework of ring [or
scheme] theory. That is to say, it may only be understood from the point of view
of a geometric framework that“lies essentially outside”,o r“is neutral with
respect to”, this two-dimensional structure [cf. the illustration of Remark 5.10.2,
(iii)].
One important property of thep-adic logarithm logk discussed above is that
the image
logk(O×
k )⊆k
—w h i c hi scompact — may be thought of as deﬁning a sort ofcanonical rigid
integral structure on k. In the present paper, we shall refer to the “canonical
rigid integral structures” obtained in this way aslog-shells. Note that the image
logk(k×)o f k× via logk is, like logk(O×
k ) [but unlike k×!], compact.T h a t i s t o
say, the operation of applying thep-adic logarithm may be thought of as a sort of
“compression”operation thatexhibits the “mass” represented by its domain as a
“somewhat smaller collection of mass” than the “mass” represented by its codomain.
In this sense, the p-adic logarithm is reminiscent of theFrobenius morphism
in positive characteristic [cf. Remark 3.6.2 for more details]. In particular, this
“compressing nature” of thep-adic logarithm may be thought of as being one that
lies insharp contrastwith the nature of an´etale morphism. This point of view is
reminiscent of the discussion of the“fundamental dichotomy”between “Frobenius-
like”and “´etale-like”structures in the Introduction of [Mzk16]. In the classical
p-adic theory, the notion of aFrobenius lifting[cf. the theory of [Mzk1], [Mzk4]]
may be thought of as forming abridge between the two sides of this dichotomy [cf.
the discussion ofmono-theta environmentsin the Introduction to [Mzk18]!] — that
is to say, a Frobenius lifting is, on the one hand, literally a lifting of the Frobenius
morphism in positive characteristic and, on the other hand, tends to satisfy the
property of being´etale in characteristic zero, i.e., of inducing an isomorphism on
diﬀerentials,once one divides byp.
In a word, the theory developed in the present paper may be summarized as
follows:
The thrust of the theory of the present paper lies in the development of a
formalism, via the use of ring/scheme structures reconstructed viamono-
anabelian geometry,i nw h i c ht h e“dismantling/compressing nature”of the
logarithm operation discussed above [cf. the Frobenius morphism in pos-
itive characteristic] is“reorganized”in an abstract combinatorial fashion

4 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
that exhibits the logarithm as a global operation on a number ﬁeld
which, moreover, is a sort of“isomomorphism up to an appropriate
renormalization operation”[cf. the isomorphism induced on diﬀeren-
tials by a Frobenius lifting,once one divides byp].
One important aspect of this theory is the analogy between this theory and [the
positive characteristic portion of]p-adic Teichm¨uller theory [cf. §I5 below], in
which the “naive pull-back” of an indigenous bundle by Frobenius never yields a
bundle isomorphic to the original indigenous bundle, but the“renormalized Frobe-
nius pull-back”does, in certain cases, allow one to obtain an output bundle that is
isomorphic to the original input bundle.
At a more detailed level, themain resultsof the present paper may be sum-
marized as follows:
In §1, we develop theabsolute anabelian algorithmsthat will be necessary in
our theory. In particular, we obtain asemi-absolute group-theoretic recon-
struction algorithm [cf. Theorem 1.9, Corollary 1.10] for hyperbolic orbicurves
of strictly Belyi type[cf. [Mzk21], Deﬁnition 3.5] oversub-p-adic ﬁelds— i.e., such
as number ﬁelds and nonarchimedean completions of number ﬁelds — that isfunc-
torial with respect to base-change of the base ﬁeld. Moreover, we observe that
the only“non-elementary”ingredient of these algorithms is the technique ofBelyi
cuspidalization d e v e l o p e di n[ M z k 2 1 ] ,§3, which depends on the main results of
[Mzk5] [cf. Remark 1.11.3]. If one eliminates this non-elementary ingredient from
these algorithms, then, in the case offunction ﬁelds,o n eo b t a i n savery elemen-
tary semi-absolute group-theoretic reconstruction algorithm[cf. Theorem 1.11],
which is valid over somewhat more general base ﬁelds, namely base ﬁelds which
are “Kummer-faithful”[cf. Deﬁnition 1.5]. The results of§1 are of interest as
anabelian results in their own right, independent of the theory of later portions
of the present paper. For instance, it is hoped that elementary results such as
Theorem 1.11 may be of use inintroductions to anabelian geometryfor advanced
undergraduatesor non-specialists[cf. [Mzk8],§1].
In §2, we develop anarchimedean— i.e.,complex analytic— analogue of the
theory of§1. One important theme in this theory is the deﬁnition of “archimedean
structures” which, likeproﬁnite Galois groups,a r e“immune to the ring structure-
dismantling and compressing nature of the logarithm”. For instance, the notion
that constitutes the archimedean counterpart to the notion of a proﬁnite Galois
group is the notion of an Aut-holomorphic structure[cf. Deﬁnition 2.1; Propo-
sition 2.2; Corollary 2.3], which was motivated by the category-theoretic approach
to holomorphic structures via the use of the topological groupSL2(R) given in
[Mzk14], §1. In this context, one central fact is the rather elementary observation
that the group of holomorphic or anti-holomorphic automorphisms of the unit disc
inthecomplexplaneis commensurably terminal[cf. [Mzk20],§0]inthegroupof
self-homeomorphisms of the unit disc [cf. Proposition 2.2, (ii)]. We also give an“al-
gorithmic reﬁnement”of the“parallelograms, rectangles, squares approach”
of [Mzk14],§2 [cf. Propositions 2.5, 2.6]. By combining these two approaches and
applying the technique ofelliptic cuspidalization developed in [Mzk21],§3, we ob-
tain a certain reconstruction algorithm [cf. Corollary 2.7] for the“local linear
holomorphic structure”of an Aut-holomorphic orbispace arising from anel-
liptically admissible [cf. [Mzk21], Deﬁnition 3.1] hyperbolic orbicurve, which is

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 5
compatiblewiththe global portionoftheGalois-theoretictheoryof §1[cf. Corollaries
2.8, 2.9].
In §3, §4, we develop the category-theoretic formalism — centering around
the notions of observables, telecores,a n dcores [cf. Deﬁnition 3.5] — that
are applied to express thecompatibilityof the“mono-anabelian”construction algo-
rithms of§1 [cf. Corollary 3.6] and§2 [cf. Corollary 4.5] with the“log-Frobenius
functor log”[in essence, a version of the usual “logarithm” at the various nonar-
chimedean and archimedean primes of a number ﬁeld]. We also study thefailure
of log-Frobenius compatibilitythat occurs if one attempts to take the“conventional
anabelian”— which we shall refer to as“bi-anabelian”— approach to the situation
[cf. Corollary 3.7]. Finally, in the remarks following Corollaries 3.6, 3.7, we discuss
in detail the meaning of the various new category-theoretic notions that are intro-
duced, as well as the various aspects of the analogy between these notions, in the
context of Corollaries 3.6, 3.7, and theclassical p-adic theory of theMF∇-objects
of [Falt].
In §5, we develop a global formalism over number ﬁelds in which we study
the canonical rigid integral structures— i.e., log-shells —t h a ta r eo b t a i n e db y
applying the log-Frobenius compatibility discussed in§3,§4. These log-shells satisfy
the following important properties:
(L1) a log-shell iscompact and hence ofﬁnite “log-volume”[cf. Corollary
5.10, (i)];
(L2) the log-volumes of (L1) arecompatible with application of thelog-
Frobenius functor[cf. Corollary 5.10, (ii)];
(L3) log-shells are compatible with the operation of“panalocalization”,
i.e., the operation of restricting to the disjoint union of the various primes
of a number ﬁeld in such a way that one“forgets” the global structureof
the number ﬁeld [cf. Corollary 5.5; Corollary 5.10, (iii)];
(L4) log-shellsare compatiblewiththeoperationof “mono-analyticization”,
i.e., the operation of“disabling the rigidity”of one of the“two combina-
torial dimensions” of a ring, an operation that corresponds to allowing
“Teichm¨uller dilations”in complex andp-adic Teichm¨uller theory [cf.
Corollary 5.10, (iv)].
In particular, we note that property (L3) may be thought of as arigidity property
for certain global arithmetic line bundles [more precisely, thetrivial arithmetic line
bundle — cf. Remarks 5.4.2, 5.4.3] that is analogous to thevery strong— i.e., by
comparison to the behavior of arbitrary vector bundles on a curve —rigidity prop-
erties satisﬁed byMF∇-objects with respect toZariski localization. Such rigidity
properties may be thought of as a sort of“freezing of integral structures”with
respect to Zariski localization [cf. Remark 5.10.2, (i)]. Finally, we discuss in some
detail [cf. Remark 5.10.3] theanalogy — centering around the correspondence
number ﬁeldF ←→ hyperbolic curveC in pos. char.
once-punctured ell. curveX over F ←→n i l p .o r d .i n d i g .b u n d l eP over C
— between the theory of the present paper [involving hyperbolic orbicurves related
to once-punctured elliptic curves over a number ﬁeld] and thep-adic Teichm¨uller

6 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
theory of [Mzk1], [Mzk4] [involving nilpotent ordinary indigenous bundles over
hyperbolic curves in positive characteristic].
Finally, in an Appendix to the present paper, we expose the portion of the
well-known theory of abelian varieties with complex multiplication[cf., e.g., [Lang-
CM], [Milne-CM], for more details] that underlies the observation “(∗CM)” related
to the author byA. Tamagawa[cf. [Mzk20], Remark 3.8.1]. In particular, weverify
that this observation (∗CM) does indeed hold. This implies that the observation
“(∗A-qLT)” discussed in [Mzk20], Remark 3.8.1, also holds, and hence, in particular,
that the hypothesis of [Mzk20], Corollary 3.9, to the eﬀect that “either (∗A-qLT)o r
(∗CM)h o l d s ”m a yb eeliminated [i.e., that [Mzk20], Corollary 3.9, holdsuncondi-
tionally]. Although the content of this Appendix is not directly technically related
to the remainder of the present paper, theglobal arithmeticnature of the content
of this Appendix, as well as the accompanying discussion of the relationship of this
global content with considerations inp-adic Hodge theory, is closely related in
spirit to the analogies between the content of the remainder of the present paper
and the theory of earlier papers in the present series of papers, i.e., more precisely,
[Mzk20], §3; [Mzk21],§2.
§I2. Fundamental Naive Questions Concerning Anabelian Geometry
One interesting aspect of the theory of the present paper is that it is intimately
related to variousfundamental questions concerning anabelian geometry that are
frequently posed by newcomers to the subject. Typical examples of these fundamen-
tal questions are the following:
(Q1) Why is it useful or meaningful to studyanabelian geometry in the
ﬁrst place?
(Q2) Whatexactlyismeantbytheterm “group-theoretic reconstruction”
in discussions of anabelian geometry?
(Q3) What is the signiﬁcance of studying anabelian geometry overmixed-
characteristic local ﬁelds [i.e., p-adic local ﬁelds] as opposed tonum-
ber ﬁelds?
(Q4) Why is birational anabelian geometryinsuﬃcient— i.e., what is the
signiﬁcance of studying the anabelian geometry of hyperbolic curves, as
opposed to their function ﬁelds?
In fact, the answers to these questions that are furnished by the theory of the
present paper are closely related.
As was discussed in§I1, the answer to (Q1), from the point of view of the
present paper, is that anabelian geometry — more speciﬁcally,“mono-anabelian
geometry”— provides a framework that is suﬃciently well-endowed as to contain
“data reminiscent of the data constituted by various scheme-theoretic structures”,
but has the virtue of being basednot on ring structures, but rather onproﬁnite
[Galois] groups, which are “neutral”with respect to the operation of taking the
logarithm.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 7
Theanswerto(Q2)isrelatedtothe algorithmicapproachtoabsoluteanabelian
geometry taken in the present three-part series [cf. the Introduction to [Mzk20]].
That is to say, typically, in discussions concerning“Grothendieck Conjecture-type
fully faithfulness results”[cf., e.g., [Mzk5]] the term “group-theoretic reconstruc-
tion” is deﬁned simply to mean“preserved by an arbitrary isomorphism between
the ´etale fundamental groups of thetwo schemes under consideration”.T h i sp o i n t
of view will be referred to in the present paper as“bi-anabelian”. By contrast,
the algorithmic approach to absolute anabelian geometry involves the development
of “software”whose input data consists solely of, for instance, asingle abstract
proﬁnite group[that just happens to be isomorphic to the ´etale fundamental group
of a scheme], and whoseoutput data consists of various structures reminiscent of
scheme theory [cf. the Introduction to [Mzk20]]. This point of view will be referred
to in the present paper as“mono-anabelian”. Here, the mono-anabelian “soft-
ware” is required to befunctorial, e.g., with respect to isomorphisms of proﬁnite
groups. Thus, it follows formally that
“mono-anabelian”=⇒ “bi-anabelian”
[cf. Remark 1.9.8]. On the other hand, although it is diﬃcult to formulate such
issues completely precisely, the theory of the present paper [cf., especially,§3] sug-
gests strongly that theopposite implication should be regarded asfalse.T h a t i s
to say, whereas themono-anabelian approach yields a framework that is“neutral”
with respect to the operation of taking thelogarithm,t h ebi-anabelian approach
fails to yield such a framework[cf. Corollaries 3.6, 3.7, and the following remarks;
§I4 below].
Here, we pause to remark that, in fact, although, historically speaking, many
theorems were originally formulated in a “bi-anabelian” fashion, careful inspec-
tion of their proofs typically leads to the recovery of “mono-anabelian algorithms”.
Nevertheless, sinceformulating theorems in a “mono-anabelian” fashion,a sw eh a v e
attempted to do in the present paper [and more generally in the present three-part
series, but cf. the ﬁnal portion of the Introduction to [Mzk21]], can be quitecumber-
some — and indeed is one of the main reasons for theunfortunately lengthynature
of the present paper! — it is often convenient to formulate ﬁnal theorems in a “bi-
anabelian” fashion. On the other hand, we note that the famousNeukirch-Uchida
theorem on the anabelian nature of number ﬁelds appears to be one important
counterexample to the above remark. That is to say, to the author’s knowledge,
proofs of this result never yield “explicit mono-anabelian reconstruction algorithms
of the given number ﬁeld”; by contrast, Theorem 1.9 of the present paperdoesgive
such anexplicit construction of the “given number ﬁeld”[cf. Remark 1.9.5].
Another interesting aspect of thealgorithmic approach to anabelian geometry
is that one may think of the “software” constituted by such algorithms as a sort of
“combinatorialization”of the original schemes [cf. Remark 1.9.7]. This point of
view is reminiscent of the operation of passing from a “scheme-theoretic”MF∇-
object to anassociated Galois representation, as well as the general theme in various
papers of the author concerning a “category-theoretic approach to scheme theory”
[cf., e.g., [Mzk13], [Mzk14], [Mzk16], [Mzk17], [Mzk18]] of“extracting from scheme-
theoretic arithmetic geometry theabstract combinatorial patternsthat underlie
the scheme theory”.

8 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
The answer to (Q3) provided by the theory of the present paper is that the
absolute p-adic [mono-]anabelianresults of§1 underlie thepanalocalizability
of log-shells discussed in §I1 [cf. property (L3)]. Put another way, these results
imply that the“geometric framework immune to the application of the logarithm”
— i.e., immune to thedismantling of the “⊞”a n d“⊠” dimensions of a ring —
discussed in§I1 may be appliedlocally at each prime of a number ﬁeldregarded as
an isolated entity, i.e., without making use of the global structure of the number
ﬁeld — cf. the discussion of “freezing of integral structures” with respect to Zariski
localization in Remark 5.10.2, (i). For more on the signiﬁcance of the operation of
passing “⊠⇝⊞ ” in the context of nonarchimedean log-shells — i.e., the operation
of passing “O×
k ⇝ logk(O×
k )” — we refer to the discussion of nonarchimedean
log-shells in§I3 below.
The answer to (Q4) furnished by the theory of the present paper [cf. Remark
1.11.4] — i.e., one fundamental diﬀerence betweenbirational anabelian geometry
and the anabelian geometry ofhyperbolic curves— is that [unlike spectra of func-
tion ﬁelds!] “most” hyperbolic curves admit“cores”[in the sense of [Mzk3],§3;
[Mzk10], §2], which may be thought of as a sort ofabstract “covering-theoretic”
analogue [cf. Remark 1.11.4, (ii)] of the notion of a“canonical rigid integral struc-
ture”[cf. the discussion oflog-shells in§I1]. Moreover, if one attempts to work with
the Galois group of afunction ﬁeldsupplemented by some additional structure such
as the set of cusps —arising from scheme theory!— that determines a hyperbolic
curve structure, then one must sacriﬁce the crucialmono-anabelian nature of one’s
reconstruction algorithms [cf. Remarks 1.11.5; 3.7.7, (ii)].
Finally, we observe that there certainly exist many “fundamental naive ques-
tions” concerning anabelian geometry for which the theory of the present paper
does not furnishany answers. Typical examples of such fundamental questions are
the following:
(Q5) What is the signiﬁcance of studying the anabelian geometry ofproper
hyperbolic curves, as opposed toaﬃne hyperbolic curves?
(Q6) Whatisthesigniﬁcanceofstudying pro-Σ[whereΣissomenonemptyset
of prime numbers] anabelian geometry, as opposed toproﬁnite anabelian
geometry [cf., e.g., Remark 3.7.6 for a discussion of why pro-Σ anabelian
geometry isill-suited to the needs of the theory of the present paper]?
(Q7) What is the signiﬁcance of studying anabelian geometry in positive
characteristic, e.g., over ﬁnite ﬁelds?
It would certainly be of interest if further developments could shed light on these
questions.
§I3. Dismantling the Two Combinatorial Dimensions of a Ring
As was discussed in§I1, aringmay be thought of as a mathematical object that
consists of“two combinatorial dimensions”, corresponding to itsadditive structure
⊞ and its multiplicative structure ⊠ [cf. Remark 5.6.1, (i)]. When the ring un-
der consideration is a [say, for simplicity, totally imaginary]number ﬁeld F or

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 9
a mixed-characteristic nonarchimedean local ﬁeld k, these two combinatorial
dimensions may also be thought of as corresponding to thetwo cohomological
dimensions of the absolute Galois groupsGF, Gk of F, k [cf. [NSW], Proposition
8.3.17; [NSW], Theorem 7.1.8, (i)]. In a similar vein, when the ring under con-
sideration is acomplex archimedean ﬁeld k (∼= C), then the two combinatorial
dimensions ofk may also be thought of as corresponding to thetwo topological
— i.e.,real — dimensions of the underlying topological space of the topological
group k×. Note that in the case where the local ﬁeldk is nonarchimedean (respec-
tively, archimedean),precisely one of the two cohomological (respectively, real)
dimensions ofGk (respectively,k×) — namely, the dimension corresponding to the
maximal unramiﬁed quotientGk ↠ ˆZ·Fr [generated by the Frobenius element] (re-
spectively, the topological subgroup of unitsS1 ∼=O×
k ⊆k×)i srigid with respect
to, say, automorphisms of the topological groupGk (respectively, k×), while the
other dimension — namely, the dimension corresponding to theinertia subgroup
Ik ⊆Gk (respectively, the value group k× ↠ R>0)—i s not rigid [cf. Remark
1.9.4]. [In the nonarchimedean case, this phenomenon is discussed in more detail in
[NSW], the Closing Remark preceding Theorem 12.2.7.] Thus, each of the various
nonarchimedean “Gk’s” and archimedean “k×’s” that arise at the various primes
of a number ﬁeld may be thought of as being a sort of“arithmetic Gm”— i.e.,
an abstract arithmetic“cylinder”— that decomposes into a [twisted] product of
“units”[i.e., Ik ⊆Gk, O×
k ⊆k×]a n dvalue group[i.e., Gk ↠ ˆZ·Fr, k× ↠ R>0]
‘arithmeticGm’ ‘units’‘×’ ‘value group’
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
↗⃝↗
↗ ⃝↗
↗ ⃝↗
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
∼
→⃝ ‘×’
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
↗
↗
↗
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
with the property that one of these two factors is rigid, while the other is not. Here,
it is interesting to note that the correspondence between units/value group and
rigid/non-rigid diﬀers[i.e., “goes in the opposite direction”] in the nonarchimedean
and archimedean cases. This phenomenon is reminiscent of theproduct formulain
elementary number theory, as well as of the behavior of the log-Frobenius functor
log at nonarchimedean versus archimedean primes [cf. Remark 4.5.2; the discussion
of log-shells in the ﬁnal portion of the present§I3].
C× ∼
→
( rigid
S1
)
×
( non-rigid
R>0
)
Gk
∼
→
( non-rigid
Ik
)
⋊
( rigid
ˆZ·Fr
)
On the other hand, the perfection of the topological group obtained as the
image of thenon-rigid portion Ik in the abelianizationGab
k of Gk is naturally iso-
morphic, by local class ﬁeld theory, tok. Moreover, by the theory of [Mzk2], the

10 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
decomposition of this copy ofk [i.e., into sets of elements with some givenp-adic val-
uation] determined by thep-adic valuation onk may be thought of as corresponding
to theramiﬁcation ﬁltrationon Gk and ispreciselythe data that is“deformed”by
automorphisms of k that do not arise from ﬁeld automorphisms. That is to say,
this aspect of the non-rigidity ofGk is quite reminiscent of the non-rigidity of the
topological groupR>0 [i.e., of the non-rigidity of the structure on this topological
group arising from the usual archimedean valuation onR, which determines an
isomorphism between this topological group and some “ﬁxed, standard copy” of
R>0].
Inthiscontext, oneoftheﬁrstimportantpointsofthe “mono-anabelian the-
ory”of§1,§2 of the present paper is that if one supplements a(n) nonarchimedean
Gk (respectively, archimedeank×) with the data arising from ahyperbolic or-
bicurve [which satisﬁes certain properties — cf. Corollaries 1.10, 2.7], then this
supplementary data has the eﬀect ofrigidifying both dimensions of Gk (re-
spectively, k×). In the case of [a nonarchimedean] Gk, this data consists of the
outer action ofGk on the proﬁnite geometric fundamental groupof the hyperbolic
orbicurve; in the case of [an archimedean]k×, this data consists, in essence, of
the variouslocal actions of open neighborhoods of the origin ofk× on the squares
or rectangles [that lie in the underlying topological [orbi]space of the Riemann
[orbi]surface determined by the hyperbolic [orbi]curve] that encode the holomor-
phic structure of the Riemann [orbi]surface [cf. the theory of [Mzk14],§2]. Here,
it is interesting to note that these“rigidifying actions”are reminiscent of the
discussion of “hidden endomorphisms”in the Introduction to [Mzk21], as well as
of the discussion of “intrinsic Hodge theory” in the context ofp-adic Teichm¨uller
theory in [Mzk4],§0.10.
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
↗⃝↗
↗ ⃝↗
↗ ⃝↗
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
rigidify
‘↷’ geometric data
representing hyp. curve
C× ↷ rectangles/squares
on hyp. Riemann surface
Gk
out
↷ proﬁnite geometric
fund. gp. of hyp. curve
Thus, in summary, the “rigidifying actions” discussed above may be thought
of as constituting a sort of“arithmetic holomorphic structure”on a nonar-
chimedean Gk or an archimedean k×. This arithmetic holomorphic structure is
immune to the log-Frobenius operationlog [cf. the discussion of§I1], i.e., immune
to the“juggling of ⊞, ⊠”eﬀected bylog [cf. the illustration of Remark 5.10.2,
(iii)].

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 11
On the other hand, if oneexits such a“zone of arithmetic holomorphy”
— an operation that we shall refer to asmono-analyticization — then a nonar-
chimedeanGk oranarchimedean k× isstrippedoftherigidityimpartedbytheabove
rigidifying actions, hence may be thought of as being subject toTeichm¨uller di-
lations [cf. Remark 5.10.2, (ii), (iii)]. Indeed, this is intuitively evident in the
archimedean case, in which the quotientk× ↠ R>0 is subject [i.e., upon mono-
analyticization, sok× is only considered as a topological group] to automorphisms
of the form R>0 ∋ x ↦→xλ ∈R>0,f o rλ∈R>0. If, moreover, one thinks of
the value groups of archimedean and nonarchimedean primes as being“synchro-
nized”[so as to keep from violating theproduct formula— which plays a crucial
role in the theory of “heights”, i.e., degrees of global arithmetic line bundles], then
the operation of mono-analyticization necessarily results in analogous “Teichm¨uller
dilations” at nonarchimedean primes. In the context of the theory ofFrobenioids,
such Teichm¨uller dilations [whether archimedean or nonarchimedean] correspond to
the unit-linear Frobenius functorstudied in [Mzk16], Proposition 2.5. Note that the
“non-linear juggling of⊞, ⊠ by log within a zone of arithmetic holomorphy”and the
“linear Teichm¨uller dilations inherent in the operation of mono-analyticization”are
reminiscent of theRiemannian geometry of the upper half-plane, i.e., if one thinks
of “juggling” as corresponding torotations at a point, and “dilations” as corre-
sponding togeodesic ﬂows originating from the point.
log
↷
⊠⊞
mono-analyticization
≈[linear] Teichm¨uller dilation
--------------------------------------- →
Put another way, the operation of mono-analyticization may be thought of as an
operation on the “arithmetic holomorphic structures” discussed above that forms
a sort ofarithmetic analogueof the operation of passing to theunderlying real
analytic manifoldof a Riemann surface.
number ﬁelds and their localizations Riemann surfaces
“arithmetic holomorphic structures” complex holomorphic structure
via rigidifying hyp. curves on the Riemann surface
the operation of passing to the underlying
mono-analyticization real analyticmanifold
Thus, from this point of view, one may think of the
disjoint union of the variousGk’s,k×’s over the various nonarchimdean
and archimedean primes of the number ﬁeld
as being the“arithmetic underlying real analytic manifold”of the “arith-
metic Riemann surface” constituted by the number ﬁeld. Indeed, it is precisely this
sort of disjoint union that arises in the theory of mono-analyticization, as developed
in §5.

12 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Next, weconsiderthe eﬀect on log-shellsoftheoperationof mono-analyticization.
In thenonarchimedean case,
logk(O×
k )∼=O×
k /(torsion)
may be reconstructed group-theoretically fromGk as the quotient by torsion of the
image ofIk in the abelianizationGab
k [cf. Proposition 5.8, (i), (ii)]; a similar con-
struction may be applied to ﬁnite extensions⊆k of k. Moreover, this construction
involvesonly the group of unitsO×
k [i.e., it does not involve thevalue groups,w h i c h ,
as discussed above, are subject toTeichm¨uller dilations], hence iscompatible with
the operation ofmono-analyticization. Thus, this construction yields acanonical
rigid integral structure, i.e., in the form of the topological module logk(O×
k ),
which may be thought of as a sort ofapproximation of some nonarchimedean
localization of the trivial global arithmetic line bundle [cf. Remarks 5.4.2,
5.4.3] that is achieved without the use of [thetwo combinatorial dimensions of]
the ring structure onOk. Note, moreover, that thering structure on the perfec-
tion logk(O×
k )pf [i.e., in eﬀect, “logk(O×
k )⊗Q”] of this module isobliteratedby the
operation of mono-analyticization. That is to say, this ring structure isonly acces-
sible within a “zone of arithmetic holomorphy”[as discussed above]. On the other
hand, if one returns to such a zone of arithmetic holomorphy to avail oneself of the
ring structure on logk(O×
k )pf, then applying the operation of mono-analyticization
amounts to applying the construction discussed above to the group of units of
logk(O×
k )pf [equipped with the ring structure furnished by the zone of arithmetic
holomorphy under consideration]. That is to say, the freedom to execute, at will,
both the operations ofexiting and re-entering zones of arithmetic holomorphy is
inextricably linked to the “juggling of⊞, ⊠”v i alog [cf. Remark 5.10.2, (ii),
(iii)].
In thearchimedean case, if one writes
log(O×
k ) ↠O×
k
for theuniversal covering topological groupof O×
k [i.e., in essence, theexponential
map “2πi·R ↠ S1”], then the surjection log(O×
k ) ↠O×
k determines on log(O×
k )a
“canonical rigid line segment of length 2π”. Thus, if one writesk = kim ×krl for
the product decomposition of the additive topological groupk into imaginary [i.e.,
“i·R”] andreal[ı.e., “R”] parts, then we obtain anatural isometry
log(O×
k )×log(O×
k )
∼
→kim ×krl = k
[i.e., the product of the identity isomorphism 2πi·R = i·R and the isomorphism
2πi· R
∼
→R given by dividing by±i] which is well-deﬁned up to multiplication
by ±1o nt h esecond factors [cf. Deﬁnition 5.6, (iv); Proposition 5.8, (iv), (v)].
In particular, “log(O×
k )× log(O×
k )” may be regarded as a construction, based on
the “rigid” topological groupO×
k [which is not subject toTeichm¨uller dilations!],
of acanonical rigid integral structure[determined by the canonical rigid line
segments discussed above] that serves as an approximation of some archimedean
localization of the trivial global arithmetic line bundle and, moreover, is compatible
with the operation of mono-analyticization [cf. the nonarchimedean case]. On the

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 13
other hand, [as might be expected by comparison to the nonarchimedean case] once
one exits a zone of arithmetic holomorphy,t h e±1-indeterminacy that occurs in the
above natural isometry has the eﬀect ofobstructing any attempts to transport the
ring structure ofk via this natural isometry so as to obtain a structure ofcomplex
archimedean ﬁeld on log(O×
k )× log(O×
k ) [cf. Remark 5.8.1]. Finally, just as in
the nonarchimedean case, the freedom to execute, at will, both the operations of
exiting and re-entering zones of arithmetic holomorphy isinextricably linked to
the “juggling of ⊞, ⊠”v i alog [cf. Remark 5.10.2, (ii), (iii)] — a phenomenon
that is strongly reminiscent of the crucial role played byrotations in the theory
of mono-analyticizations of archimedean log-shells [cf. Remark 5.8.1].
§I4. Mono-anabelian Log-Frobenius Compatibility
Within each zone of arithmetic holomorphy, one wishes to apply the log-
Frobenius functor log. As discussed in §I1, log may be thought of as a sort of
“wall”that may bepenetratedby such “elementary combinatorial/topological ob-
jects” asGalois groups[in the nonarchimedean case] orunderlying topological spaces
[in the archimedean case], butnot by rings or functions[cf. Remark 3.7.7]. This
situation suggests a possible analogy with ideas from physics in which“´etale-like”
structures [cf. the Introduction of [Mzk16]], which canpenetrate the log-wall,a r e
regarded as“massless”, likelight, while“Frobenius-like”structures [cf. the Intro-
duction of [Mzk16]], whichcannot penetrate the log-wall, are regarded as being of
“positive mass”, like ordinary matter [cf. Remark 3.7.5, (iii)].
( Galois groups,
topological spaces
)
∼=
-------------------
( rings,
functions
)
≇
log
log
log
log
∼=
( Galois groups,
topological spaces
)
-------------------
≇
( rings,
functions
)
In the archimedean case, since topological spaces alone are not suﬃcient to trans-
port “holomorphic structures” in the usual sense, we take the approach in§2 of con-
sidering “Aut-holomorphic spaces”, i.e., underlying topological spaces of Riemann
surfaces equipped with the additional data of agroup of “special self-homeomor-
phisms”[i.e., bi-holomorphic automorphisms] of each [suﬃciently small] open con-
nected subset [cf. Deﬁnition 2.1, (i)]. The point here is to“somehow encode the
usual notion of a holomorphic structure”in such a way that one does not need to
resort to the use of“ﬁxed reference models”of the ﬁeld of complex numbersC
[as is done in the conventional deﬁnition of a holomorphic structure, which consists
of local comparisonto such a ﬁxed reference model ofC], since such models ofC
fail to be “immune”to the application oflog — cf. Remarks 2.1.2, 2.7.4. This
situation is very much anarchimedean analogueof the distinction betweenmono-
anabelian and bi-anabelian geometry. That is to say, if one thinks of one of the

14 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
two schemes that occur in bi-anabelian comparison results as the“given scheme of
interest”and the other scheme as a“ﬁxed reference model”, then although these
two schemes arerelatedto one another via purely Galois-theoretic data, the scheme
structure of the “scheme of interest” is reconstructed from the Galois-theoretic data
bytransporting the scheme structure of “model scheme”, hence requires the use of
input data[i.e., the scheme structure of the “model scheme”] thatcannot penetrate
the log-wall.
In order to formalize these ideas concerning the issue of distinguishing between
“model-dependent”, “bi-anabelian” approaches and “model-independent”, “mono-
anabelian”approaches, wetakethepointofview, in §3,§4, ofconsidering“series of
operations”— in the form ofdiagrams [parametrized by variousoriented graphs]
of functors — applied to various“types of data”— in the form of objects of
categories [cf. Remark 3.6.7]. Although, by deﬁnition, it is impossible tocompare
the “diﬀerent types of data” obtained by applying these various “operations”, if
one considers“projections”of these operations between diﬀerent types of data onto
morphisms between objects of a single category [i.e., a single “type of data”], then
such comparisons become possible. Such a “projection” is formalized in Deﬁnition
3.5, (iii), as the notion of anobservable. One special type of observable that is of
crucialimportanceinthetheoryofthepresentpaperisanobservablethat“captures
a certain portion of various distinct types of data that remainsconstant,u pt o
isomorphism, throughout the series of operations applied to these distinct types of
data”. Such an observable is referred to as acore [cf. Deﬁnition 3.5, (iii)]. Another
important notion in the theory of the present paper is the notion oftelecore [cf.
Deﬁnition 3.5, (iv)], which may be thought of as a sort of “core structure whose
compatibility apparatus [i.e., ‘constant nature’] only goes into eﬀect after a certain
time lag” [cf. Remark 3.5.1].
Before explaining how these notions are applied in the situation overnumber
ﬁelds considered in the present paper, it is useful to consider the analogy between
these notions and theclassical p-adic theory.
The prototypeof the notion of acore is theconstant nature[i.e., up to
equivalence of categories] of the´etale site of a scheme in positive char-
acteristic with respect to the [operation constituted by the]Frobenius
morphism.
Put another way, cores may be thought of as corresponding to the notion of“slope
zero”Galois representations in thep-adic theory. By contrast,telecores may be
thought of as corresponding to the notion of“positive slope”in thep-adic theory.
In particular, the “time lag” inherent in the compatibility apparatus of a telecore
may be thought of as corresponding to the “lag”, in terms of powers ofp,t h a t
occurs when one applies Hensel’s lemma [cf., e.g., [Mzk21], Lemma 2.1] to lift
solutions, modulo various powers ofp, of a polynomial equation that gives rise to
a crystalline Galois representation — e.g., arising from an “MF∇-object” of [Falt]
— for which the slopes of the Frobenius action arepositive [cf. Remark 3.6.5 for
more on this topic]. This formal analogy with the classicalp-adic theory forms the
starting point for the analogy withp-adic Teichm¨uller theoryto be discussed in§I5
below [cf. Remark 3.7.2].

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 15
Now let us return to the situation involvingk, k, Gk,a n dl o gk discussed at
the beginning of§I1. Suppose further that we are given a hyperbolic orbicurve over
k as in the discussion of§I3, whose ´etale fundamental group Π surjects ontoGk
[hence may be regarded as acting onk, k
×
] and, moreover, satisﬁes the important
property ofrigidifying Gk [as discussed in§I3]. Then the“series of operations”
performed in this context may be summarized as follows [cf. Remark 3.7.3, (ii)]:
Π ⇝
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
Π
↷
k
×
An
⎞
⎟⎟⎠ ⇝
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
Π
↷
k
×
⋎ ↶ log
⎞
⎟⎟⎠ ⇝ Π ⇝
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
Π
↷
k
×
An
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
Here, the variousoperations“⇝”, “↶” may be described in words as follows:
(O1) One applies the mono-anabelian reconstruction algorithms of §1
to Π to construct a “mono-anabelian copy”k
×
An of k
×
. Here, k
×
An
is the
group of nonzero elements of a ﬁeldkAn. Moreover, it is important to note
that kAn is equipped with the structurenot of “some ﬁeld kAn isomorphic
to k”, but rather of “thespeciﬁc ﬁeld [isomorphic tok] reconstructed via
the mono-anabelian reconstruction algorithms of§1”.
(O2) One forgets the fact that kAn arises from the mono-anabelian recon-
struction algorithms of§1, i.e., one regards kAn just as “some ﬁeld k⋎
[isomorphic tok]”.
(O3) Having performed the operation of (O2), one can now proceed to apply
log-Frobenius operation log [i.e., logk]t ok⋎.T h i so p e r a t i o nlog may
be thought of as the assignment
(Π ↷ k
×
⋎) ⇝ (Π ↷ {logk⋎
(O×
k⋎
)pf}×)
that maps the group of nonzero elements of the topological ﬁeldk⋎ to the
group of nonzero elements of the topological ﬁeld “logk⋎
(O×
k⋎
)pf”[ c f .t h e
discussion of§I3].
(O4) One forgets all the data except for the proﬁnite group Π.
(O5) This is the same operation as the operation described in (O1).
With regard to the operationlog, observe that if weforgetthe various ﬁeld or group
structures involved, then the arrows
k
×
⋎ ←↩ O×
k⋎
→ logk⋎
(O×
k⋎
)pf ←↩ {logk⋎
(O×
k⋎
)pf}×
allow one to relate theinput of log [on the left] to the theoutput of log [on the right].
That is to say, in the formalism developed in§3, these arrows may be regarded as
deﬁning anobservable “Slog” associated tolog [cf. Corollary 3.6, (iii)].

16 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
If one allows oneself to reiterate the operationlog, then one obtains diagrams
equipped with anatural Z-action [cf. Corollary 3.6, (v)]. These diagrams equipped
with aZ-action are reminiscent, at acombinatorial level, of the“arithmetic Gm’s”
that occurred in the discussion of§I3 [cf. Remark 3.6.3].
Next, observe that the operation of“projecting toΠ”[i.e., forgetting all of the
data under consideration except for Π] iscompatible with the execution of any of
these operations (O1), (O2), (O3), (O4), (O5). That is to say, Π determines acore
of this collection of operations [cf. Corollary 3.6, (i), (ii), (iii)]. Moreover, since
the mono-anabelian reconstruction algorithmsof §1a r e“purely group-theoretic”
and depend only on the input data constituted byΠ, it follows immediately that [by
“projecting to Π” and then applying these algorithms] “(Π↷ k
×
An)” also forms a
core of this collection of operations [cf. Corollary 3.6, (i), (ii), (iii)]. In particular,
we obtain anatural isomorphismbetween the “(Π↷ k
×
An)’s” that occur following
the ﬁrst and fourth “⇝’s” of the above diagram.
On the other hand, the “forgetting” operation of (O2) may be thought of as a
sort ofsectionof the “projection to the core (Π↷ k
×
An)”. This sort of section will
be referred to as atelecore; a telecore frequently comes equipped with an auxiliary
structure, called acontact structure, which corresponds in the present situation
to the isomorphism of underlying ﬁelds [stripped of their respective zero elements]
k
×
An
∼
→k
×
⋎ [cf. Corollary 3.6, (ii)]. Even though the core “(Π↷ k
×
An)”, regarded
as an object obtained by projecting, isconstant [up to isomorphism], thesection
obtained in this way doesnot yield a“constant”collection of data [with respect to
the operations of the diagram above] that iscompatible with the observableSlog.
Indeed, forgetting the marker “An”o f[ t h econstant] k
×
An and then applyinglog is
not compatible, relative to Slog, with forgetting the marker “An” — i.e., since
log obliterates the ring structures involved [cf. Corollary 3.6, (iv); Remark
3.6.1]. Nevertheless, if, subsequent to applying the operations of (O2), (O3), one
projects back down to “(Π↷ k
×
An)”, then, as was observed above, one obtains a
natural isomorphismbetween the initial and ﬁnal copies of “(Π↷ k
×
An)”. It is in
this sense that one may think of a telecore as a“core with a time lag”.
One way to summarize the above discussion is as follows: The “purely group-
theoretic”mono-anabelian reconstruction algorithms of§1 allow one to construct
models of scheme-theoretic data [i.e., the “k
×
An”] that satisfy the following three
properties[cf. Remark 3.7.3, (i), (ii)]:
(P1) coricity [i.e., the “property of being a core” of “Π”, “(Π↷ k
×
An)”];
(P2) comparability [i.e., via the telecore and contact structures discussed
above] withlog-subject copies [i.e., the “k
×
⋎”, which are subject to the
action of log];
(P3) log-observability[i.e., via “Slog”].
One way to understand better what is gained by thismono-anabelian approach is
to consider what happens if one takes abi-anabelian approach to this situation
[cf. Remarks 3.7.3, (iii), (iv); 3.7.5].

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 17
In the bi-anabelian approach, instead of taking just “Π” as one’s core, one
takes the data
(Π ↷ k
×
model)
—w h e r e“kmodel” is someﬁxed reference model of k —a so n e ’ score [cf.
Corollary 3.7, (i)]. The bi-anabelian version [i.e., fully faithfulness in the style of
the “Grothendieck Conjecture”] of the mono-anabelian theory of§1 then gives rise
to telecore and contact structures by considering the isomorphismk
×
model
∼
→k
×
⋎
arising from an isomorphism between the “Π’s” that act onk
×
model
, k
×
⋎
[cf. Corollary
3.7, (ii)]. Moreover, onemaydeﬁnean observable“Slog”asinthemono-anabelian
case[cf. Corollary3.7, (iii)]. Justasinthemono-anabeliancase, since logobliterates
the ring structuresinvolved, this modelk
×
model fails to be simultaneously compatible
with the observableSlog and the telecore and [a slight extension, as described in
Corollary 3.7, (ii), of the] contact structures just mentioned [cf. Corollary 3.7,
(iv)]. On the other hand, whereas in the mono-anabelian case, one mayrecover
from this failure of compatibility by projecting back down to “Π” [which remains
intact!] and hence to “(Π↷ k
×
An)”, in the bi-anabelian case, the “k
×
model
” portion
of “the core (Π↷ k
×
model) ”—w h i c hi sa nessential portion of theinput datafor
reconstruction algorithms via thebi-anabelian approach! [cf. Remarks 3.7.3, (iv);
3.7.5, (ii)] — isobliterated by log, thus rendering itimpossible to relate the
“(Π ↷ k
×
model)’s”before and after the application oflog via an isomorphism that
is compatible with all of the operations involved. At a more technical level, the non-
existence of such a natural isomorphism may be seen in the fact that thecoricityof
“(Π ↷ k
×
model)” is only asserted in Corollary 3.7, (i), for acertain limited portion
of the diagram involving “all of the operations under consideration” [cf. also the
incompatibilitiesof Corollary 3.7, (iv)]. This contrasts with the[manifest!] coricity
of “Π”, “(Π↷ k
×
An)” with respect toall of the operations under consideration in
the mono-anabelian case [cf. Corollary 3.6, (i), (ii), (iii)].
In this context, one important observation is that if one tries to“subsume”the
model “k
×
model”i n t oΠb y“regarding”this model as an object that “arises from the
sole input dataΠ”, then one must contend with various problems from the point of
view of functoriality — cf. Remark 3.7.4 for more details on such“functorially
trivial models”. That is to say, to regard “k
×
model” in this way means that one
must contend with a situation in which the functorially induced action of Π on
“k
×
model”i strivial!
Finally, we note in passing that the“dynamics”of the various diagrams of
operations [i.e., functors] appearing in the above discussion are reminiscent of the
analogy with physics discussed at the beginning of the present§I4 — i.e., that “Π”
is massless, likelight, while “k
×
⋎”i so fpositive mass.
§I5. Analogy with p-adic Teichm¨uller Theory
We have already discussed in§I1 the analogy between thelog-Frobeniusoper-
ation log and theFrobenius morphismin positive characteristic. This analogy may
be developed further [cf. Remarks 3.6.6, 3.7.2 for more details] into an analogy be-
tween the formalism discussed in§I4 and the notion of auniformizingMF∇-object

18 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
as discussed in [Mzk1], [Mzk4], i.e., anMF∇-object in the sense of [Falt] that
gives rise to“canonical coordinates”that may be regarded as a sort ofp-adic uni-
formization of the variety under consideration. Indeed, in the notation of§I4, the
“mono-anabelian output data(Π ↷ k
×
An)” may be regarded as corresponding
to the“Galois representation”associated to a structure of“uniformizing MF∇-
object”on thescheme-theoretic “(Π ↷ k
×
⋎)”. Thetelecorestructures discussed
in§I4 may be regarded as corresponding to a sort ofHodge ﬁltration, i.e., an opera-
tion relating the “Frobenius crystal” under consideration to aspeciﬁc scheme theory
“(Π ↷ k
×
⋎)”, among the various scheme theories separated from one another by
[the non-ring-homomorphism!] log. The associated contact structures then take
on an appearance that is formally reminiscent of the notion of aconnectionin the
classical crystalline theory. Thefailure of the log-observable, telecore, and contact
structures to besimultaneously compatible[cf. Corollaries 3.6, (iv); 3.7, (iv)] may
then be regarded as corresponding to the fact that, for instance in the case of the
uniformizing MF∇-objects determined by indigenous bundles in [Mzk1], [Mzk4],
the Kodaira-Spencer morphism is an isomorphism[i.e., the fact that the Hodge
ﬁltration fails to be a horizontal Frobenius-invariant!].
mono-anabelian theory p-adic theory
log-Frobenius log Frobenius
mono-anabelian output data Frobenius-invariants
telecore structure Hodge ﬁltration
contact structure connection
simultaneous incompatibility of Kodaira-Spencer morphism of an
log-observable, telecore, and indigenous bundle is an
contact structures isomorphism
In the context of this analogy, we observe that thefailure of the logarithms
at the variouslocalizations of a number ﬁeld toextend to a global map involving
the number ﬁeld [cf. Remark 5.4.1] may be regarded as corresponding to thefail-
ure of variousFrobenius liftings on aﬃne opens[i.e., localizations] of a hyperbolic
curve [over, say, a ring of Witt vectors of a perfect ﬁeld] toextend t oam o r p h i s m
deﬁned [“globally”] on theentire curve[cf. [Mzk21], Remark 2.6.2]. This lack of
a global extension in thep-adic case means, in particular, that it does not make
sense to pull-back arbitrary coherent sheaves on the curve via such Frobenius lift-
ings. On the other hand, if a coherent sheaf on the curve is equipped with the
structure of acrystal,t h e na“global pull-back of the crystal” is well-deﬁned and
“canonical”, even though the various local Frobenius liftings used to construct it
are not. In a similar way, although the logarithms at localizations of a number
ﬁeld are not compatible with the ring structuresinvolved, hence cannot be used to
pull-back arbitrary ring/scheme-theoretic objects, theycan be used to “pull-back”
Galois-theoretic structures, such as those obtained by applyingmono-anabelian re-
construction algorithms.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 19
mono-anabelian theory p-adic theory
logarithms at localizations Frobenius liftingson
of a number ﬁeld aﬃne opensof a hyperbolic curve
nonexistence of global logarithm nonexistence of global Frobenius
on a number ﬁeld lifting on a hyperbolic curve
incompatibilityof log with noncanonicalityof local liftings
ring structures of positive characteristicFrobenius
compatibility of log with Galois, Frobenius pull-back of
mono-anabelian algorithms crystals
the result of forgetting “An” the underlying coherent sheaf
[cf. (O2) of§I3] of a crystal
Moreover, this analogy may be developed even further by specializing from
arbitrary uniformizingMF∇-objects to theindigenous bundles of the p-adic Te-
ichm¨uller theory of [Mzk1], [Mzk4]. To see this, we begin by observing that the
non-rigid dimensionof thelocalizations of a number ﬁeld“Gk”, “k×” in the discus-
sion of§I3 may be regarded as analogous to thenon-rigidity of ap-adic deformation
of an aﬃne open[i.e., a localization] of a hyperbolic curve in positive character-
istic. If, on the other hand, such a hyperbolic curve is equipped with thecrystal
determined by ap-adic indigenous bundle, then, even if onerestricts to an aﬃne
open, this ﬁltered crystal has the eﬀect ofrigidifying a speciﬁc p-adic deformation
of this aﬃne open. Indeed, this rigidifying eﬀect is an immediate consequence of
the fact that the Kodaira-Spencer morphism of an indigenous bundle is an iso-
morphism. Put another way, this Kodaira-Spencer isomorphism has the eﬀect of
a l l o w i n gt h ea ﬃ n eo p e nt o“entrust its moduli”to the crystal determined by
the p-adic indigenous bundle. This situation is reminiscent of therigidifying ac-
tions discussed in §I3 of “Gk”, “k×” on certain geometric data arising from a
hyperbolic orbicurvethat is related to a once-punctured elliptic curve. That is to
say, the mono-anabelian theory of§1, §2 allows these localizations “Gk”, “k×”o f
an u m b e rﬁ e l dt o“entrust their ring structures”— i.e., their “arithmetic
holomorphic moduli”— to the hyperbolic orbicurve under consideration. This
leads naturally [cf. Remark 5.10.3, (i)] to the analogy already referred to in§I1:
mono-anabelian theory p-adic theory
number ﬁeldF hyperbolic curveC in pos. char.
once-punctured ell. curveX over F nilp. ord. indig. bundleP over C
If, moreover, one modiﬁes thecanonical rigid integral structuresfurnished bylog-
shells by means of the“Gaussian zeroes”[i.e., the inverse of the “Gaussian poles”]
that appear in theHodge-Arakelov theory of elliptic curves[cf., e.g., [Mzk6],
§1.1], then one may further reﬁne the above analogy by regardingindigenous bun-
dles as corresponding to thecrystalline theta object[which may be thought of as

20 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
an object obtained by equipping a direct sum of trivial line bundles with the inte-
gral structures determined by the Gaussian zeroes] of Hodge-Arakelov theory [cf.
Remark 5.10.3, (ii)]. From this point of view, the mono-anabelian theory of§1,
§2, which may be thought of as centering around the technique ofBelyi cuspidal-
izations, may be regarded as corresponding to the theory ofindigenous bundles
in positive characteristic[cf. [Mzk1], Chapter II], which centers around theVer-
schiebung on indigenous bundles. Moreover, the theory of the´etale theta function
given in [Mzk18], which centers around the technique ofelliptic cuspidalizations,
may be regarded as corresponding to the theory of theFrobenius action on square
diﬀerentialsin [Mzk1], Chapter II. Indeed, just as the technique of elliptic cuspidal-
izations may be thought of a sort oflinearized, simpliﬁed versionof the technique
of Belyi cuspidalizations, the Frobenius action on square diﬀerentials occurs as the
derivative [i.e., a “linearized, simpliﬁed version”] of the Verschiebung on indige-
nous bundles. For more on this analogy, we refer to Remark 5.10.3. In passing,
we observe, relative to the point of view that the theory of the ´etale theta func-
tion given in [Mzk18] somehow represents a “linearized, simpliﬁed version” of the
mono-anabelian theory of the present paper, that the issue ofmono- versus bi-
anabelian geometry discussed in the present paper is vaguely reminiscent of the
issue ofmono- versusbi-theta environments, which constitutes a central theme in
[Mzk18]. In this context, it is perhaps natural to regard the“log-wall”discussed in
§I4 — which forms the principal obstruction to applying thebi-anabelian approach
in the present paper — as corresponding to the“Θ-wall”constituted by the theta
function between thetheta and algebraictrivializations of a certain ample line bun-
dle — which forms the principal obstruction to the use ofbi-theta environments in
the theory of [Mzk18].
mono-anabelian theory p-adic theory
crystalline theta objects scheme-theoretic
in scheme-theoretic indigenous bundles
Hodge-Arakelov theory [cf. [Mzk1], Chapter I]
Belyi cuspidalizations Verschiebungon pos. char.
in mono-anabelian theory indigenous bundles
of §1 [cf. [Mzk1], Chapter II]
elliptic cuspidalizations Frobenius actionon
in the theory of the square diﬀerentials
´etale theta function [cf. [Mzk18]] [cf. [Mzk1], Chapter II]
Thus, in summary, the analogy discussed above may be regarded as an anal-
ogy between the theory of the present paper and thepositive characteristic portion
of the theory of [Mzk1]. This “positive characteristic portion” may be regarded
as including, in a certain sense, the “liftings modulop2 portion” of the theory of
[Mzk1] since this “liftings modulo p2 portion” may be formulated, to a certain
extent, in terms of positive characteristic scheme theory. If, moreover, one re-
gards the theory of mono-anabelian log-Frobenius compatibility as corresponding
to “Frobenius liftings modulop2”, then the isomorphism betweenGalois groups
on both sides of thelog-wall may be thought of as corresponding to theFrobenius

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 21
action on diﬀerentialsinduced by dividing the derivative of such a Frobenius lift-
ing modulo p2 by p. This correspondence between Galois groups and diﬀerentials
is reminiscent of the discussion in [Mzk6],§1.3, §1.4, of the arithmetic Kodaira-
Spencer morphismthat arises from the [scheme-theoretic] Hodge-Arakelov theory
of elliptic curves. Finally, from this point of view, it is perhaps natural to regard the
mono-anabelian reconstruction algorithmsof §1 as corresponding to the procedure
of integrating Frobenius-invariant diﬀerentialsso as to obtaincanonical coordinates
[i.e., “q-parameters” — cf. [Mzk1], Chapter III,§1].
mono-anabelian theory p-adic theory
isomorphism between Frobenius action on diﬀerentials
Galois groupson arising from 1
p· derivative
both sides oflog-wall of modp2 Frobenius lifting
mono-anabelian construction of can. coords.
reconstruction via integration of
algorithms Frobenius-invariant diﬀerentials
The above discussion prompts the following question:
Can one further extend the theory given in the present paper to a theory
that is analogous to the theory of canonical p-adic liftings given in
[Mzk1], Chapter III?
It is the intention of the author to pursue the goal of developing such an“extended
theory”in a future paper. Before proceeding, we note that the analogy of such
a theory with the theory of canonicalp-adic liftings of [Mzk1], Chapter III, may
be thought of as a sort ofp-adic analogue of the“geodesic ﬂow”portion of the
“rotations and geodesic ﬂows diagram” of§I3:
mono-anabelian theory p-adic theory
mono-anabelian juggling positive characteristic
of present paper, i.e., [plus modp2] portion of
“rotations” p-adic Teichm¨uller theory
future extended theory (?), i.e., canonical p-adic liftings
“geodesic ﬂows” in p-adic Teichm¨uller theory
—t h a ti st os a y ,p-adic deformations correspond to “geodesic ﬂows”, while the
positive characteristic theory corresponds to“rotations”[i.e., the theory of“mono-
anabelian juggling of⊞, ⊠ via log”given in the present paper]. This point of view is
reminiscent of the analogy between the archimedean and nonarchimedean theories
discussed in Table 1 of the Introduction to [Mzk14].
In this context, it is interesting to note that thisanalogy between themono-
anabelian theory of the present paper andp-adic Teichm¨uller theory isreminiscent
of various phenomena that appear in earlier papers by the author:

22 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(A1) In [Mzk10], Theorem 3.6, anabsolute p-adic anabelianresult is obtained
forcanonical curvesasin[Mzk1]byapplyingthe p-adic Teichm¨uller theory
of [Mzk1]. Thus, in a certain sense [i.e., “Teichm¨uller =⇒ anabelian” as
opposed to “anabelian =⇒Teichm¨uller”], this result goes in theopposite
direction to the direction of the theory of the present paper. On the other
hand, this result of [Mzk10] depends on the analysis in [Mzk9],§2, of the
logarithmic special ﬁber of ap-adic hyperbolic curve viaabsolute anabelian
geometry over ﬁnite ﬁelds.
(A2) The reconstruction of the “additive structure”via the mono-anabelian
algorithms of§1[ c f . t h elemma of Uchidareviewed in Proposition 1.3],
which eventually leads [as discussed above], via the theory of§3, to an
abstract analogue of“Frobenius liftings”[i.e., in the form of uniformizing
MF∇-objects] is reminiscent [cf. Remark 5.10.4] of the reconstruction
of the “additive structure” in [Mzk21], Corollary 2.9, via an argument
analogous to an argument that may be used to show thenon-existence of
Frobenius liftingson p-adic hyperbolic curves [cf. [Mzk21], Remark 2.9.1].
One way to think about (A1), (A2) is by considering the following chart:
p-adic Teichm¨uller Future “Teichm¨uller-like”
Theory (applied to Extension (?) of
anabelian geometry) Mono-anabelian Theory
number ﬁelds, mixed char.
Uchida’s Lemma characteristic p local ﬁelds equipped with
applied to: special ﬁber an elliptically admissible
hyperbolic orbicurve
analogue of
Deformation canonical p-adic Frobenius liftings
Theory: Frobenius liftings in future extension (?)
of mono-anabelian theory
Here, the correspondence in the ﬁrst non-italicized line between hyperbolic curves
in positive characteristic equipped with a nilpotent ordinary indigenous bundle and
number ﬁelds [and their localizations] equipped with an elliptically admissible hy-
perbolic orbicurve [i.e., a hyperbolic orbicurve closely related to a once-punctured
elliptic curve] has already been discussed above; the content of the “p-adic Te-
ichm¨uller theory column” of this chart may be thought of as a summary of the
content of (A1); the correspondence between this column and the “extended mono-
anabelian theory” column may be regarded as a summary of the preceding dis-
cussion. On the other hand, the content of (A2) may be thought of as a sort of
“remarkable bridge”
canonical p-adic
Frobenius liftings
theory of geometric
uniformly toral
neighborhoods
===========
number ﬁelds, mixed char.
local ﬁelds equipped with
an elliptically admissible
hyperbolic orbicurve

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 23
between the upper right-hand and lower left-hand non-italicized entries of the above
chart. That is to say, the theory of (A2) [i.e., ofgeometric uniformly toral neigh-
borhoods— cf. [Mzk21],§2] is related to the upper right-hand non-italicized entry
of the chart in that, like the application of “Uchida’s Lemma” represented by this
entry, it provides a means forrecovering the ring structure of the base ﬁeld, given
the decomposition groups of the closed points of the hyperbolic orbicurve.O nt h e
other hand, the theory of (A2) [i.e., of [Mzk21],§2] is related to the lower left-hand
entry of the chart in that the main result of [Mzk21],§2, is obtained by an argument
reminiscent [cf. [Mzk21], Remark 2.6.2; [Mzk21], Remark 2.9.1] of the argument to
the eﬀect thatstable curvesover rings of Witt vectors of a perfect ﬁeldnever admit
Frobenius liftings.
Note, moreover, that from the point of view of the discussion above of “arith-
metic holomorphic structures”, thisbridge may be thought of as a link between the
elementary algebraic approachtoreconstructingthe “two combinatorial dimen-
sions”of a ring in the fashion ofUchida’s Lemmaand the“ p-adic diﬀerential-
geometric approach”to reconstructing p-adic ring structures in the fashion of
the theory of [Mzk21],§2. Here, we observe that this “p-adic diﬀerential-geometric
approach” makes essential use of thehyperbolicityof the curve under consideration.
Indeed, roughly speaking, from the “Teichm¨uller-theoretic”point of view of the
present discussion, the argument of the proof of [Mzk21], Lemma 2.6, (ii), may be
summarized as follows:
The nonexistence of the desired“geometric uniformly toral neighborhoods”
may be thought of as a sort of nonexistence ofobstructions to Teichm¨uller
deformations of the “arithmetic holomorphic structure” that extend in an
unbounded, linear fashion, like a geodesic ﬂow orFrobenius lifting.O n
the other hand, thehyperbolicityof the curve under consideration implies
the existence oftopological obstructions— i.e., in the form of“loopiﬁca-
tion”or “crushed components”[cf. [Mzk21], Lemma 2.6, (ii)] — to such
“unbounded” deformations of the holomorphic structure. Moreover, such
“compact bounds”on the deformability of the holomorphic structure are
suﬃcientto “trap”theholomorphicstructureata “canonical point”,w h i c h
corresponds to the original holomorphic [i.e., ring] structure of interest.
Put another way, this “p-adic diﬀerential-geometric interpretation of hyperbolicity”
is reminiscent of the dynamics of arubber band,w h o s eelasticity implies that
even if one tries to stretch the rubber band in an unbounded fashion, the rubber
band ultimately returns to a“canonical position”. Moreover, this relationship be-
tween hyperbolicity and “elasticity” is reminiscent of the use of the term“elastic”
in
describing certain group-theoretic aspects of hyperbolicity in the theory of [Mzk20],
§1, §2.
In passing, we observe that another important aspect of the theory of [Mzk21],
§2, in the present context is the use of theinequality of degrees obtained by
“diﬀerentiating a Frobenius lifting”[cf. [Mzk21], Remark 2.6.2]. The key
importanceofsuchdegreeinequalitiesinthetheoryof[Mzk21], §2, suggests, relative
to the above chart, that the analogue of such degree inequalities in the theory of
“the analogue of Frobenius liftings in a future extension of the mono-anabelian

24 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
theory” could give rise to results of substantial interest in thearithmetic of number
ﬁelds. The author hopes to address this topic in more detail in a future paper.
Finally, we close the present Introduction to the present paper with some
historical remarks. We begin by considering the followinghistorical facts:
(H1) O. Teichm¨uller, in his relatively short career as a mathematician, made
contributions both to “complex Teichm¨uller theory”and to the theory of
Teichm¨uller representatives of Witt rings — two subjects that, at ﬁrst
glance, appear entirely unrelated to one another.
(H2) In the Introduction to [Ih], Y. Ihara considers the issue of obtaining
canonical p-adic liftings of certain positive characteristic hyperbolic curves
equipped with a correspondence in a fashion analogous to theSerre-Tate
theory of canonical liftings of abelian varieties.
These two facts may be regarded asinteresting precursorsof thep-adic Teichm¨uller
theory of [Mzk1], [Mzk4]. Indeed, thep-adic Teichm¨uller theory of [Mzk1], [Mzk4]
may be regarded, on the one hand, as an analogue for hyperbolic curves of the
Serre-Tate theory of canonical liftings of abelian varieties and, on the other hand,
as ap-adic analogue of complex Teichm¨uller theory; moreover, the canonical liftings
obtained in [Mzk1], [Mzk4] are, literally, “hyperbolic curve versions of Teichm¨uller
representativesinWittrings”. Infact, onemayevengoonestepfurthertospeculate
that perhaps the existence of analogous complex andp-adic versions of “Teichm¨uller
theory” should be regarded ashinting of a deeper abstract, combinatorial
version of “Teichm¨uller theory” — in a fashion that is perhaps reminiscent of the
relationship of the notion of amotive to various complex orp-adic cohomology
theories. It is the hope of the author that a possible “future extended theory”
as discussed above — i.e., a sort of“Teichm¨uller theory” for number ﬁelds
equipped with a once-punctured elliptic curve— might prove to be just such
a“ T e i c h m ¨uller theory”.
Acknowledgements:
I would like to thankYuichiro Hoshi, Fumiharu Kato, Akio Tamagawa,a n dGo
Yamashita for countless stimulating discussions concerning the material presented
in this paper andMinhyong Kimand Ben Moonenfor stimulating questions related
to certain of the ideas presented in this paper. Also, I feel most indebted toYuichiro
Hoshi, Go Yamashita,a n dMohamed Sa¨ıdifor their meticulous reading of and
numerous comments concerning the present paper. Finally, I would like to thank
Ivan Fesenkofor his comments concerning the present paper.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 25
Section 0: Notations and Conventions
We shall continue to use the “Notations and Conventions” of [Mzk20],§0;
[Mzk21], §0. In addition, we shall use the following notation and conventions:
Numbers:
In addition to the“ﬁeld types”NF, MLF, FF introduced in [Mzk20],§0, we
shall also consider the following ﬁeld types: A(n)complex archimedean ﬁeld(re-
spectively, real archimedean ﬁeld; archimedean ﬁeld), or CAF (respectively, RAF;
AF), is deﬁned to be a topological ﬁeld that is isomorphic to the ﬁeld of complex
numbers (respectively, the ﬁeld of real numbers; either the ﬁeld of real numbers
or the ﬁeld of complex numbers). One veriﬁes immediately that any continuous
homomorphism between CAF’s (respectively, RAF’s) is, in fact, anisomorphism of
topological ﬁelds.
Combinatorics:
Let E be apartially ordered set. Then [cf. [Mzk16],§0] we shall denote by
Order(E)
the category whose objects are elements e ∈E, and whose morphisms e1 →e2
[where e1,e2 ∈E]a r et h er e l a t i o n se1 ≤e2. A subset E′ ⊆E will be called
orderwise connectedif for everyc∈E such a<c<b for somea,b ∈E′, it follows
that c∈E′.
A partially ordered set which is isomorphic [as a partially ordered set] to an
orderwise connected subset of the set of rational integersZ, equipped with its usual
ordering, will be referred to as acountably ordered set.I f E is a countably ordered
set, then any choice of an isomorphism ofE with an orderwise connected subset
E′ ⊆Z allows one to deﬁne [in a fashion independent of the choice ofE′], for
non-maximal (respectively, non-minimal) e ∈E [i.e., e such that there exists an
f ∈E that is>e (respectively, <e )], an element “e+1” (respectively, “e−1”) of
E. Pairs of elements ofE of the form (e,e +1) will be referred to asadjacent.
An oriented graph⃗Γ is a graph Γ, which we shall refer to as theunderlying
graph of ⃗Γ, equipped with the additional data of a total ordering, for each edgee
of Γ, on the set [of cardinality 2] ofbranches of e [cf., e.g., [Mzk13], the discussion
at the beginning of§1, for a deﬁnition of the terms “graph”, “branch”]. In this
situation, we shall refer to the vertices, edges, and branches of Γ as vertices, edges,
and branches of⃗Γ; writeV(⃗Γ),E(⃗Γ),B(⃗Γ), respectively, for the sets of vertices,
edges, and branches of⃗Γ. Also, whenever Γ satisﬁes a property of graphs [such
as “ﬁniteness”], we shall say that⃗Γ satisﬁes this property. We shall refer to the
oriented graph ⃗Γopp obtained from ⃗Γb yreversing the ordering on the branches
of each edge as theopposite oriented graphto ⃗Γ. Amorphism of oriented graphs
is deﬁned to be a morphism of the underlying graphs [cf., e.g., [Mzk13],§1, the
discussion at the beginning of §1] that is compatible with the orderings on the

26 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
edges. Note that any countably ordered set E may be regarded as an oriented
graph — i.e., whose vertices are the elements ofE, whose edges are the pairs of
adjacent elements ofE, and whose branches are equipped with the [total] ordering
induced by the ordering of E. We shall refer to an oriented graph that arises
from a countably ordered set aslinear. We shall refer to the vertex of a linear
oriented graph⃗Γ determined by aminimal (respectively, maximal) element of the
corresponding countably ordered set as theminimal vertex(respectively, maximal
vertex)o f⃗Γ.
Let ⃗Γb ea noriented graph. Then we shall refer to as apre-path [of lengthn]
[where n≥0 is an integer] on⃗Γ a morphismγ: ⃗Γγ→⃗Γ, where⃗Γγis aﬁnite linear
oriented graphwith preciselyn edges; we shall refer to as apath [of lengthn] on ⃗Γ
any isomorphism class [γ] in the category of oriented graphs over⃗Γ of a pre-pathγ
[of lengthn]. Write
Ω(⃗Γ)
for the set [i.e., since we are working withisomorphism classes!] of paths on⃗Γ. If
γ: ⃗Γγ→⃗Γ is a pre-path on⃗Γ, then we shall refer to the image of the minimal
(respectively, maximal) vertex of⃗Γγ as the initial (respectively, terminal)v e r t e x
of γ,[ γ]. Two [pre-]paths with the same initial (respectively, terminal; initial and
terminal) vertices will be referred to as co-initial (respectively, co-terminal; co-
verticial). If γ1, γ2 are pre-paths on⃗Γ such the initial vertex ofγ2 is equal to the
terminal vertex of γ1, then one may form thecomposite pre-pathγ2 ◦γ1 [in the
evident sense], as well as thecomposite path[γ2]◦[γ1]
def
=[ γ2◦γ1]. Thus, the length
of γ2 ◦γ1 is equal to the sum of the lengths ofγ1, γ2.
Next, let
E ⊆Ω(⃗Γ)×Ω(⃗Γ)
be a set of ordered pairs of pathson an oriented graph⃗Γ. Then we shall say that
E is saturatedif the following conditions are satisﬁed:
(a) (Partial Inclusion of the Diagonal)If ([γ1],[γ2]) ∈E,t h e nE contains
([γ1],[γ1]) and ([γ2],[γ2]).
(b) (Co-verticiality) If ([γ1],[γ2])∈E,t h e n[γ1], [γ2]a r eco-verticial.
(c) (Transitivity)If ([γ1],[γ2])∈E and ([γ2],[γ3])∈E,t h e n( [γ1],[γ3])∈E.
(d) (Pre-composition)If ([γ1],[γ2])∈E and [γ3]∈Ω(⃗Γ), then ([γ1]◦[γ3],[γ2]◦
[γ3])∈E, whenever these composite paths are deﬁned.
(e) (Post-composition) If ([γ1],[γ2]) ∈E and [γ3] ∈Ω(⃗Γ), then ([γ3] ◦
[γ1],[γ3]◦[γ2])∈E, whenever these composite paths are deﬁned.
We shall say thatE is symmetrically saturated if E is saturated and, moreover,
satisﬁes the following condition:
(f) (Reﬂexivity) If ([γ1],[γ2])∈E,t h e n( [γ2],[γ1])∈E.
Thus, the set of allco-verticial pairs of paths
Covert(⃗Γ)⊆Ω(⃗Γ)×Ω(⃗Γ)

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 27
is symmetrically saturated. Moreover, the property of being saturated (respectively,
symmetrically saturated) is closed with respect to formingarbitrary intersections
of subsets of Ω(⃗Γ)×Ω(⃗Γ). In particular, given any subsetE ⊆Covert(⃗Γ), it makes
sense to speak of thesaturation (respectively, symmetric saturation)o f E — i.e.,
the smallest saturated (respectively, symmetrically saturated) subset of Covert(⃗Γ)
containing E.
Let ⃗Γb ea noriented graph. Then we shall refer to a vertexv of ⃗Γa sanexus
of ⃗Γ if the following conditions are satisﬁed: (a) the oriented graph⃗Γv obtained
by removing from⃗Γt h ev e r t e xv, together with all of the edges that abut tov,
decomposes as a disjoint union of two nonempty oriented graphs ⃗Γ<v, ⃗Γ>v;( b )
every edge of⃗Γ that is not contained in⃗Γv either runs from a vertex of⃗Γ<v to
v or from v t oav e r t e xo f⃗Γ>v. In this situation, we shall refer to the oriented
subgraph ⃗Γ≤v (respectively, ⃗Γ≥v) consisting ofv, ⃗Γ<v (respectively, ⃗Γ>v), and all
of the edges of⃗Γ that run to (respectively, emanate from)v as thepre-nexus portion
(respectively, post-nexus portion)o f⃗Γ.
Categories:
Let C, C′ be categories. Then we shall use the notation
Ob(C); Arr( C)
to denote, respectively, theobjects and arrows of C. We shall refer to a functor
φ:C→C ′ as rigid if every automorphism ofφis equal to the identity [cf. [Mzk16],
§0]. If the identity functor ofC is rigid, then we shall say thatC is id-rigid.
Let C be a category and ⃗Γ an oriented graph. Then we shall refer to as a
⃗Γ-diagram{Av,φe} in C a collection of data as follows:
(a) for each v∈V(⃗Γ), an objectAv of C;
(b) for each e ∈E(⃗Γ) that runs fromv1 ∈V(⃗Γ) tov2 ∈V(⃗Γ), a morphism
φe : Av1 →Av2 of C.
A morphism{Av,φe}→{ A′
v,φ′
e
} of ⃗Γ-diagrams inC is deﬁned to be a collection
of morphismsψv : Av →A′
v for each vertexv of ⃗Γ that are compatible with theφe,
φ′
e. We shall refer to an⃗Γ-diagram inC as commutativeif the composite morphisms
determined by any co-verticial pair of paths on⃗Γ coincide. Write
C[⃗Γ]
for the category of commutative⃗Γ-diagrams inC and morphisms of⃗Γ-diagrams in
C.
If C1, C2,a n dD are categories,a n d
Φ1 :C1 →D;Φ 2 :C2 →D

28 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
are functors, then we deﬁne the“categorical ﬁber product”[cf. [Mzk16],§0]
C1 ×D C2
of C1, C2 over D to be thecategorywhose objects are triples
(A1,A2,α:Φ1(A1)
∼
→Φ2(A2))
where Ai ∈Ob(Ci)( f o ri =1 ,2), αis an isomorphism ofD; and whosemorphisms
(A1,A2,α:Φ1(A1)
∼
→Φ2(A2))→(B1,B2,β:Φ1(B1)
∼
→Φ2(B2))
are pairs of morphismsγi : Ai →Bi [in Ci,f o ri =1 ,2] such thatβ◦Φ1(γ1)=
Φ2(γ2)◦α. OneveriﬁeseasilythatifΦ 2 isan equivalence, thenthenatural projection
functor C1 ×D C2 →C1 is also anequivalence.
We shall use the preﬁx “ind-” (respectively, “pro-”) to mean, strictly speaking,
a(n) inductive (respectively, projective) system indexed by an ordered set isomor-
phic to the positive (respectively, negative) integers, with their usual ordering. To
simplify notation, however, we shall often denote “ind-objects” via the correspond-
ing “limit objects”, when there is no fear of confusion.
LetC be acategory. Then we shall refer to a pair (S,A), whereS ∈Ob(C), and
A⊆AutC(S) is a subgroup, as apre-orbi-object of C. [Thus, we think of the pair
(S,A) as representing the“stack-theoretic quotient ofS by A”.] A morphism of
pre-orbi-objects(S1,A1)→(S2,A2)i sa nA2-orbit of morphismsS1 →S2 [relative
to the action ofA2 on the codomain] that is closed under the action ofA1 [on the
domain]. We shall refer to as anorbi-object
{(Sι,Aι);αι,ι′}ι,ι′∈I
any collection of data consisting of pre-orbi-objects (Sι,Aι), which we shall refer to
as representatives [of the given orbi-object], together with“gluing isomorphisms”
αι,ι′ :( Sι,Aι)
∼
→(Sι′,Aι′) of pre-orbi-objects satisfying the cocycle conditions
αι,ι′′ = αι′,ι′′ ◦αι,ι′,f o rι,ι′,ι′′ ∈I.A morphism of orbi-objects is deﬁned to
be a collection of morphisms of pre-orbi-objects from each representative of the
domaintoeachrepresentativeofthe codomainwhichare compatiblewiththegluing
isomorphisms. Thecategory of orbi-objects associated toC is the category — which
we shall denote
Orb(C)
—w h o s eobjectsare the orbi-objects ofC, and whosemorphisms are the morphisms
of orbi-objects. Thus, an object may be regarded as a pre-orbi-object whose group
of automorphisms is trivial; a pre-orbi-object may be regarded as an orbi-object
with precisely one representative. In particular, we obtain anatural functor
C→ Orb(C)
which is“functorial”[in the evident sense] with respect toC.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 29
Section 1: Galois-theoretic Reconstruction Algorithms
In the present§1, we apply the technique ofBelyi cuspidalization developed
in [Mzk21], §3, to give a group-theoretic reconstruction algorithm[cf. Theorem
1.9, Corollary 1.10] for hyperbolic orbicurvesof strictly Belyi type [cf. [Mzk21],
Deﬁnition 3.5] oversub-p-adic ﬁeldsthat iscompatiblewith base-change of the base
ﬁeld. In the case offunction ﬁelds, this reconstruction algorithm reduces to amuch
more elementary algorithm[cf. Theorem 1.11], which is valid over somewhat more
general base ﬁelds, namely base ﬁelds which are“Kummer-faithful”[cf. Deﬁnition
1.5].
Let X be ahyperbolic curveover aﬁeld k.W r i t eKX for thefunction ﬁeld of
X. Then the content of following result is a consequence of the well-known theory
of divisors on algebraic curves.
Proposition 1.1. (Review of Linear Systems) Suppose thatX is proper,
and thatk is algebraically closed. Write Div(f) for thedivisor [of zeroes minus
poles onX]o ff ∈KX.I f E is adivisor on X, then let us write
Γ×(E)
def
= {f ∈KX | Div(f)+ E ≥0}
[where we use the notation “(−)≥0” to denote the eﬀectivity of the divisor “(−)”],
l(E)
def
=d i mk(Γ(X,OX(E))).L e tD be adivisor on X.T h e n :
(i) Γ×(D) admits a naturalfree actionby k× whenever it is nonempty; there
is a natural bijectionΓ×(D)
∼
→Γ(X,OX(D))\{0} that is compatible with thek×-
actions on either side, whenever the sets of the bijection are nonempty.
(ii) The integerl(D) ≥0 is equal to the smallest nonnegative integerd such
that there exists an eﬀective divisorE of degreed on X for whichΓ×(D−E)= ∅.
In particular,l(D)=0 if and only ifΓ×(D)= ∅.
Proposition 1.2. (Additive Structure via Linear Systems) Let X, k be
as in Proposition 1.1. Then:
(i) There existdistinct points x,y1,y2 ∈X(k), together with adivisor D
on X such that x,y1,y2 ̸∈Supp(D) [where we write Supp(D) for the support of
D], such thatl(D)=2 , l(D−E)=0 , for any eﬀective divisorE = e1 +e2,w h e r e
e1 ̸= e2, {e1,e2}⊆{x,y1,y2}.
(ii) Let x, y1, y2, D be as in (i). Then for i =1 ,2, λ∈k×, there ex-
ists a unique element fλ,i ∈Γ×(D) ⊆KX such that fλ,i(x)= λ, fλ,i(yi) ̸=0 ,
fλ,i(y3−i)=0 .
(iii) Let x, y1, y2, D be as in (i); λ,μ∈k× such that λ/μ̸= −1; fλ,1 ∈
Γ×(D)⊆KX, fμ,2 ∈Γ×(D)⊆KX as in (ii). Then
fλ,1 +fμ,2 ∈Γ×(D)⊆KX

30 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
may becharacterized as the unique elementg∈Γ×(D)⊆KX such thatg(y1)=
fλ,1(y1), g(y2)= fμ,2(y2). In particular, in this situation, the elementλ+μ∈k×
may be characterized as the elementg(x)∈k×.
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). Let D be any divisor on X such that
l(D)≥2. By subtracting an appropriate eﬀective divisor fromD, we may assume
that l(D)=2 . T h e nt a k ex ∈X(k)\Supp(D)t ob ea n yp o i n ts u c ht h a tOX(D)
admits a global section that does not vanish atx [so l(D−x) = 1]; take y1 ∈
X(k)\(Supp(D) ⋃{x}) to be any point such thatOX(D−x) admits a global section
that does not vanish aty1 [so l(D−x−y1) = 0, which implies thatl(D−y1)=
1]; take y2 ∈X(k)\(Supp(D) ⋃{x,y1})t ob ea n yp o i n ts u c ht h a tOX(D −x),
OX(D−y1) admit global sections that do not vanish aty2 [so l(D−x−y2)=
l(D−y1 −y2) = 0]. This completes the proof of assertion (i). Now assertions (ii),
(iii) follow immediately from assertion (i).⃝
Thefollowing reconstruction of the additive structure from divisors and rational
functions is implicit in the argument of [Uchi],§3, Lemmas 8-11 [cf. also [Tama],
Lemma 4.7].
Proposition 1.3. (Additive Structure via Valuation and Evaluation
Maps) Let X, k be as in Proposition 1.1. Then there exists afunctorial algo-
rithm for constructing the additive structure on K×
X
⋃{0} [i.e., arising from
the ﬁeld structure ofKX] from the following data:
(a) the [abstract!] group K×
X;
(b) the set of [surjective] homomorphisms
VX
def
= {ordx : K×
X ↠ Z}x∈X(k)
[so we have a natural bijectionVX
∼
→X(k)] that arise as valuation maps
associated to pointsx∈X(k);
(c) for each homomorphism v =o r dx ∈VX,t h esubgroup Uv ⊆K×
X given
by thef ∈K×
X such thatf(x)=1 .
Here, the term “functorial” is with respect toisomorphisms [in the evident sense]
of suchtriples [i.e., consisting of a group, a set of homomorphisms from the group
to Z, and a collection of subgroups of the group parametrized by elements of this
set of homomorphisms] arising from proper hyperbolic curves [i.e., “X”] over alge-
braically closed ﬁelds [i.e., “k”].
Proof. Indeed, ﬁrst we observe thatk× ⊆K×
X may be constructed as the inter-
section ⋂
v∈VX
Ker(v). Since, for v ∈VX,w eh a v eadirect product decomposition
Ker(v)= Uv ×k×, the projection tok× allows us to“evaluate”elements of Ker(v)
[i.e., “functions that are invertible at the point associated tov”], so as to obtain
“values”of such elements∈k×. Next, let us observe that the set of homomorphisms

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 31
VX of (b) allows one to speak ofdivisors and eﬀective divisorsassociated to [the
abstract group]K×
X of (a). IfD is a divisor associated toK×
X,t h e nw em a ydeﬁne
Γ×(D) as in Proposition 1.1, and hencecompute the integerl(D)a si nP r o p o s i t i o n
1.1, (ii). In particular, it makes sense to speak of data as in Proposition 1.2, (i),
associated to the abstract data (a), (b), (c). Thus, byevaluating elements of vari-
ous Ker(v), forv∈VX, we may apply thecharacterizations of Proposition 1.2, (ii),
(iii), to construct theadditive structureof k×, hence also theadditive structureof
K×
X [i.e., by “evaluating” at variousv∈VX]. ⃝
Remark 1.3.1. Note that ifGis an abstract group, then the datum of asurjection
v : G ↠ Z may be thought of as the datum of asubgroup H
def
=K e r (v), together
with the datum of achoice of generatorof the quotient groupG/H
∼
→Z.
Proposition 1.4. (Synchronization of Geometric Cyclotomes) Suppose
that X is proper, and thatk is ofcharacteristic zero.I f U ⊆X is a nonempty
open subscheme, then we have anatural exact sequenceof proﬁnite groups
1→ΔU →ΠU →Gk →1
— where we writeΠU
def
= π1(U)→Gk
def
= π1(Spec(k)) for the natural surjection of
´etale fundamental groups [relative to some choice of basepoints],ΔU for the kernel
of this surjection. Then:
(i) Let U ⊆X be a nonempty open subscheme, x ∈X(k)\U(k), Ux
def
=
X\{x}⊆X. Then the inertia group Ix of x in ΔU is naturally isomorphic
to ˆZ(1); the kernels of the natural surjectionsΔU ↠ ΔUx, ΠU ↠ ΠUx are topolog-
ically normally generated by the inertia groups of points ofUx\U [each of which is
naturally isomorphic to ˆZ(1)].
(ii) Let x, Ux be as in (i). Then we have a natural exact sequence of
proﬁnite groups
1→Ix →Δc-cn
Ux →ΔX →1
— where we writeΔUx ↠ Δc-cn
Ux for themaximal cuspidally centralquotient of
ΔUx [i.e., the maximal intermediate quotientΔUx ↠ Q ↠ ΔX such thatKer(Q ↠
ΔX) lies in the center ofQ — cf. [Mzk19], Deﬁnition 1.1, (i)]. Moreover, applying
the diﬀerential of the “E2-term” of theLeray spectral sequence associated to
this group extension to the element
1∈ˆZ = Hom(Ix,Ix)= H0(ΔX,H1(Ix,Ix))
yields anelement∈H2(ΔX,H0(Ix,Ix)) = Hom(MX,Ix), where we write
MX
def
= Hom(H2(ΔX, ˆZ), ˆZ)
[cf. the discussion at the beginning of [Mzk19],§1]; this last element corresponds to
the natural isomorphism
MX
∼
→Ix

32 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
[relative to the well-known natural identiﬁcations ofIx, MX with ˆZ(1) — cf., e.g.,
(i) above; [Mzk19], Proposition 1.2, (i)]. In particular, this yields a “purely
group-theoretic algorithm”[cf. Remark 1.9.8 below for more on the meaning
of this terminology] for constructing this isomorphism from the surjectionΔUx ↠
ΔX.
Proof. Assertion (i) is well-known [and easily veriﬁed from the deﬁnitions]. Asser-
tion (ii) follows immediately from [Mzk19], Proposition 1.6, (iii).⃝
Deﬁnition 1.5. Let k be a ﬁeld of characteristic zero,k an algebraic closure
of k, Gk
def
= Gal(k/k). Then we shall say thatk is Kummer-faithful (respectively,
torally Kummer-faithful) if, for every ﬁnite extensionkH ⊆k of k,w h e r ew ew r i t e
H
def
= Gal(k/kH) ⊆Gk, and everysemi-abelian variety(respectively, everytorus)
A over kH, either of the following two equivalent conditions is satisﬁed:
(a) We have ⋂
N≥1
N·A(kH)= {0}
—w h e r eN ranges over the positive integers.
(b) The associated Kummer mapA(kH) →H1(H,Hom(Q/Z,A(k))) is an
injection.
[To verify the equivalence of (a) and (b), it suﬃces to consider, on the ´etale site
of Spec(kH), the long exact sequences in ´etale cohomology associated to the exact
sequences 0 −→NA −→A
N·
−→A −→0 arising from multiplication
by positive integersN.]
Remark 1.5.1. In the notation of Deﬁnition 1.5, suppose thatk is a torally
Kummer-faithful ﬁeld, l a prime number. Then it follows immediately from the
injectivity of the Kummer map associated toGm over any ﬁnite extension ofk that
contains a primitivel-th root of unity that thecyclotomic characterχl : Gk →Z×
l
has open image [cf. the notion of “l-cyclotomic fullness”discussed in [Mzk20],
Lemma 4.5]. In particular, it makes sense to speak of the“power-equivalence class
of χl”[cf. [Mzk20], Lemma 4.5, (ii)] among characters Gk →Z×
l — i.e., the
equivalence class with respect to the equivalence relationρ1 ∼ρ2 [for characters
ρ1,ρ2 : Gk →Z×
l ] deﬁned by the condition thatρN
1 = ρN
2 for some positive integer
N.
Remark 1.5.2. By considering the Weil restrictions of semi-abelian varieties
or tori over ﬁnite extensions ofk to k, one veriﬁes immediately that one obtains
an equivalent deﬁnition of the terms “Kummer-faithful” and “torally Kummer-
faithful” if, in Deﬁnition 1.5, one restrictskH to beequal tok.
Remark 1.5.3. In the following discussion, ifk is a ﬁeld, then we denote the
subgroup ofroots of unityof k× by μ(k)⊆k×.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 33
(i) Letk be a(n) [not necessarily ﬁnite!]algebraic ﬁeld extension of anumber
ﬁeld such that there exists anonarchimedean primeof k that is unramiﬁed over
some number ﬁeld contained ink, and, moreover, for every ﬁnite extensionk† of k,
μ(k†)i sﬁnite.T h e nIclaim that:
k is torally Kummer-faithful.
Indeed, since [as one veriﬁes immediately] any ﬁnite extension ofk satisﬁes the same
hypotheses ask, one veriﬁes immediately that it suﬃces to show that⋂
N (k×)N =
{1} [where N ranges over the positive integers]. Letf ∈⋂
N (k×)N.I f f ∈μ(k),
then the assumption concerning μ(k) implies immediately that f =1 ;t h u s ,w e
may assume without loss of generality thatf ̸∈μ(k). But then there exists a
nonarchimedean prime p of k that isunramiﬁed over some number ﬁeld contained
in k. In particular, if we writekp for the completion ofk at p and p for the residue
characteristic of p,t h e nkp embeds into a ﬁnite extension of the quotient ﬁeld of
the ring of Witt vectors of an algebraic closure ofFp. Thus, the fact thatf admits
arbitrary p-power roots inkp yields a contradiction. This completes the proof of
the claim.
(ii) It follows immediately from the deﬁnitions that“Kummer-faithful =⇒
torally Kummer-faithful”. On the other hand, as was pointed out to the author by
A. Tamagawa, one may construct an example of a ﬁeld which istorally Kummer-
faithful, but not Kummer-faithful, as follows: Let E be an elliptic curve over a
number ﬁeldk0 that admitscomplex multiplicationby Q(√−1) and, moreover, has
good reductionat every nonarchimedean prime ofk0.L e tk be an algebraic closure
of k0, Gk0
def
= Gal(k/k0), p ap r i m en u m b e r≡1( m o d4 ) .W r i t eV for the p-adic
Tate moduleassociated to E.T h u s ,t h eGk0-module V decomposes [since p ≡1
(mod 4)] into a direct sumW ⊕W′ of submodulesW,W ′ ⊆V of rank one. Write
χ: Gk0 →Z×
p for the character determined byW. Thus, [as is well-known]χis
unramiﬁed over every nonarchimedean prime ofk0 of residue characteristicl ̸= p,
as well as oversome nonarchimedean prime ofk0 of residue characteristicp.B u t
one veriﬁes immediately [for instance, by considering ramiﬁcation overQ] that this
implies that, if we writek for the extension ﬁeld ofk0 determined by the kernel
of χ,t h e nμ(k)i s ﬁnite. Thus, since any ﬁnite extension ofk0 satisﬁes the same
hypotheses ask0, we conclude thatk satisﬁes the hypotheses of (i),s ok is torally
Kummer-faithful. On the other hand, [by the deﬁnition ofχ, W, V!] the Kummer
map onE(k)i snot injective,s ok is not Kummer-faithful.
Remark 1.5.4.
(i) Observe that everysub-p-adic ﬁeld k [cf. [Mzk5], Deﬁnition 15.4, (i)] is
Kummer-faithful, i.e.,“sub-p-adic =⇒ Kummer-faithful”. Indeed, to verify this,
one reduces immediately, by base-change, to the case wherek is aﬁnitely generated
extension of an MLF, which may be thought of as the function ﬁeld of a variety over
an MLF. Then by restricting to various closed points of this variety, one reduces
to the case where k itself is an MLF. On the other hand, if k, hence also k
H
[cf. the notation of Deﬁnition 1.5], is a ﬁnite extension ofQp,t h e nA(kH)i sa n
extension of a ﬁnitely generatedZ-module by a compact abelianp-adic Lie group,
hence contains an open subgroup that is isomorphic to a ﬁnite product of copies of
Zp. In particular, the condition of Deﬁnition 1.5, (a), is satisﬁed.

34 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(ii) A similar argument to the argument of (i) shows thatevery ﬁnitely gen-
erated extensionof a Kummer-faithful ﬁeld (respectively, torally Kummer-faithful
ﬁeld) is itselfKummer-faithful (respectively, torally Kummer-faithful ﬁeld).
(iii)Ontheotherhand, observethatif, forinstance, I isan inﬁnite set, thenthe
ﬁeld k
def
= Qp(xi)i∈I [which is not a ﬁnitely generated extension ofQp] constitutes
an example of aKummer-faithful ﬁeld which isnot sub-p-adic. Indeed, if, for H,
A as in Deﬁnition 1.5, 0̸= f ∈A(kH) lies in the kernel of the associated Kummer
map, then observe that there exists someﬁnite subset I′ ⊆I such that if we set
k′ def
= Qp(xi)i∈I′, then, for some ﬁnite extensionk′
H ⊆kH of k′, we may assume
that A descends to a semi-abelian varietyA′ over k′
H,t h a tf ∈A′(k′
H) ⊆A(kH),
and thatkH = k′
H(xi)i∈I′′, where we setI′′ def
= I\I′.S i n c ek′
H is algebraically closed
in kH, it thus follows that all roots off deﬁned over kH are in fact deﬁned over
k′
H. Thus, the existence of f contradicts the fact that thesub-p-adic ﬁeld k′
H is
Kummer-faithful. Finally, to see that k is not sub-p-adic, suppose that k ⊆K,
where K is a ﬁnitely generated extension of an MLFK0 of residue characteristicp0
such thatK0 is algebraically closedin K.L e tl̸= p,p0 be a prime number. Then
Qp ⊇k∗def
=
⋂
lN
(k×)lN
⊆K∗def
=
⋂
lN
(K×)lN
⊆K0
— where one veriﬁes immediately that the additive group generated byk∗(respec-
tively, K∗)i nk (respectively, K) forms a compact open neighborhood of 0 inQp
(respectively, K0). In particular, it follows that the inclusionk↪→K determines a
continuous homomorphism of topological ﬁeldsQp ↪→K0. But this implies imme-
diately thatp0 = p,a n dt h a tQp ↪→K0 is aQp-algebra homomorphism.T h u s ,t h e
theory oftranscendence degreeyields a contradiction [for instance, by considering
the morphism on K¨ahler diﬀerentials induced byk↪→K].
(iv) One veriﬁes immediately that thegeneralized sub-p-adic ﬁelds of [Mzk8],
Deﬁnition 4.11, arenot, in general, torally Kummer-faithful.
Proposition 1.6. (Kummer Classes of Rational Functions) In the situ-
ation of Proposition 1.4, suppose further thatk is a Kummer-faithful ﬁeld.I f
U ⊆X is a nonemptyopen subscheme, then let us write
κU :Γ (U,O×
U)→H1(ΠU,MX)
—w h e r eMX ∼= ˆZ(1) is as in Proposition 1.4, (ii) — for the associatedKummer
map [cf., e.g., the discussion at the beginning of [Mzk19],§2]. Also, for d ∈Z,
let us writeJd →Spec(k) for the connected component of thePicard scheme of
X →Spec(k) that parametrizes line bundles of degreed [cf., e.g., the discussion
preceding [Mzk19], Proposition 2.2];J
def
= J0; ΠJd
def
= π1(Jd). [Thus, we have a
natural morphism X →J1 that sends a point ofX t ot h el i n eb u n d l eo fd e g r e e
1 associated to the point; this morphism induces a surjection ΠX ↠ ΠJ1 on
´etale fundamental groups whose kernel is equal to the commutator subgroup ofΔX.]
Then:
(i) The Kummer mapκU is injective.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 35
(ii) For x ∈X(k), write sx : Gk →ΠX for the associated section [well-
deﬁned up to conjugation by ΔX], tx : Gk →ΠJ1 for the composite of sx with
the natural surjectionΠX ↠ ΠJ1. Then for any divisorD of degreed on X such
that Supp(D)⊆X(k), forming the appropriateZ-linear combination of “tx’s” for
x∈Supp(D) [cf., e.g., the discussion preceding [Mzk19], Proposition 2.2] yields a
section tD : Gk →ΠJd; if, moreover,d =0 ,t h e ntD : Gk →ΠJ coincides [up to
conjugation byΔX] with the section determined by theidentity element∈J(k)
if and only if the divisorD is principal.
(iii) Suppose thatU = X\S,w h e r eS ⊆X(k) is a ﬁnite subset. Then restrict-
ing cohomology classes ofΠU to the variousIx [cf. Proposition 1.4, (i)], forx∈S,
yields a natural exact sequence
1→(k×)∧→H1(ΠU,MX)→
( ⨁
x∈S
ˆZ
)
— where we identify HomˆZ(Ix,MX) with ˆZ via the isomorphism Ix
∼
→MX of
Proposition 1.4, (ii);(k×)∧ denotes the proﬁnite completion ofk×. Moreover, the
image [viaκU]o fΓ(U,O×
U) in H1(ΠU,MX)/(k×)∧ is equal to the inverse image in
H1(ΠU,MX)/(k×)∧ of the submodule of
( ⨁
x∈S
Z
)
⊆
( ⨁
x∈S
ˆZ
)
determined by theprincipal divisors[with support inS].
Proof. Assertion (i) follows immediately [by restricting to smaller and smaller
“U’s”] from the fact [cf. Remark 1.5.4, (ii)] that sincek is [torally] Kummer-
faithful,s oi st h efunction ﬁeld KX of X. Assertion (ii) follows from the argument
of [Mzk19], Proposition 2.2, (i), together with the assumption thatk is Kummer-
faithful. As for assertion (iii), just as in the proof of [Mzk19], Proposition 2.1, (ii),
to verify assertion (iii), it suﬃces to verify thatH0(Gk,Δab
X ) = 0; but, in light of
the well-known relationship between Δab
X and thetorsion pointsof the JacobianJ,
the fact thatH0(Gk,Δab
X ) = 0 follows immediately from our assumption thatk is
Kummer-faithful [cf. the argument applied toGm in Remark 1.5.1].⃝
Deﬁnition 1.7. Suppose thatk is ofcharacteristic zero.L e tk be analgebraic
closure of k;w r i t ekNF ⊆k for the [“number ﬁeld”] algebraic closureof Q in k.
(i) We shall say thatX is anNF-curve if Xk
def
= X×k k is deﬁned overkNF [cf.
Remark 1.7.1 below].
(ii) Suppose that X is an NF-curve. Then we shall refer to points ofX(k)
(respectively, rational functions on Xk; constant rational functions on Xk [i.e.,
which arise from elements ofk]) that descend tokNF [cf. Remark 1.7.1 below] as
NF-points of (respectively,NF-rational functionson; NF-constants on) Xk.
Remark 1.7.1. Suppose that X is of type (g,r). Then observe that X is an
NF-curve if and only if thek-valued point of themoduli stack of hyperbolic curves

36 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
of type(g,r)o v e rQ determined byX arises, in fact, from akNF-valued point. In
particular, one veriﬁes immediately that ifX is anNF-curve, then thedescent data
of Xk from k to kNF is unique.
Proposition 1.8. (Characterization of NF-Constants and NF-Rational
Functions)In the situation of Proposition 1.6, (iii), suppose further thatU [hence
also X]i sa nNF-curve. Write
PU ⊆H1(ΠU,MX)
for the inverse image of the submodule of
( ⨁
x∈S
Z
)
⊆
( ⨁
x∈S
ˆZ
)
determined by thecuspidal principal divisors[i.e., principal divisors supported
on the cusps] — cf. Proposition 1.6, (iii). Then:
(i) A class η∈PU is the Kummer class of a nonconstant NF-rational
function if and only if there exist apositive multiple η† of ηand NF-points
xi ∈U(kx),w h e r ei =1 ,2,a n dkx is a ﬁnite extension ofk, such that the coho-
mology classes
η†|xi
def
= s∗
xi(η†)∈H1(Gkx,MX)
— where we writesxi : Gkx →ΠU for the [outer] homomorphism determined by
xi [cf. the notation of Proposition 1.6, (ii)] — satisfyη†|x1 =0 [i.e., =1 ,i fo n e
works multiplicatively],η†|x2 ̸=0 .
(ii) Suppose that thereexist nonconstant NF-rational functions∈Γ(U,O×
U).
Then a classη∈PU
⋂H1(Gk,MX)∼= (k×)∧ [cf. the exact sequence of Proposition
1.6, (iii)] is the Kummer class of anNF-constant∈k× if and only if there exist a
nonconstant NF-rational functionf ∈Γ(U,O×
U) and anNF-point x∈U(kx),
where kx is a ﬁnite extension ofk, such that
κU(f)|x = η|Gkx ∈H1(Gkx,MX)
— where we use the notation “|x”a si n( i ) .
Proof. Suppose thatXk descends to a hyperbolic curveXNF overkNF. Then [since
kNF is algebraically closed] any nonconstant rational function onXNF determines
a morphism XNF →P1
kNF
such that the induced mapXNF(kNF) →P1
kNF
(kNF)i s
surjective. In light of this fact [cf. also the fact thatU is also assumed to be an
NF-curve], assertions (i), (ii) follow immediately from the deﬁnitions.⃝
Now, by combining the“reconstruction algorithms”given in the various results
discussed above, we obtain the main result of the present§1.
Theorem 1.9. (The NF-portion of the Function Field via Belyi Cus-
pidalization over Sub-p-adic Fields) Let X be a hyperbolic orbicurve of

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 37
strictly Belyi type [cf. [Mzk21], Deﬁnition 3.5] over a sub-p-adic ﬁeld [cf.
[Mzk5], Deﬁnition 15.4, (i)] k, for some prime p; k an algebraic closure of k;
kNF ⊆k the algebraic closure ofQ in k;
1→ΔX →ΠX →Gk →1
—w h e r eΠX
def
= π1(X) →Gk
def
= Gal(k/k) denotes the natural surjection of ´etale
fundamental groups [relative to some choice of basepoints], andΔX denotes the
kernel of this surjection — the resultingextension of proﬁnite groups.T h e n
there exists afunctorial “group-theoretic” algorithm[cf. Remark 1.9.8 below
for more on the meaning of this terminology] for reconstructing the“NF-portion
of the function ﬁeld”of X from theextension of proﬁnite groups1→ΔX →
ΠX →Gk →1; this algorithm consists of the following steps:
(a) One constructs the varioussurjections
ΠU ↠ ΠY
—w h e r eY is a hyperbolic [NF-]curve that arises as a ﬁnite ´etale covering
of X; U ⊆Y is an open subscheme obtained by removing an arbitrary
ﬁnite collection of NF-points; ΠU
def
= π1(U); ΠY
def
= π1(Y) ⊆ΠX —
via the technique of“Belyi cuspidalization”, as described in [Mzk21],
Corollary 3.7, (a), (b), (c). Here, we note that by allowingU to vary,w e
obtain a “group-theoretic” construction ofΠU equipped with the collection
of subgroups that arise asdecomposition groups of NF-points.
(b) One constructs thenatural isomorphisms
Iz
∼
→μ ˆZ(ΠU)
def
= MZ
—w h e r eU ⊆Y →X is as in (i),Y is of genus≥2, Z is the canonical
compactiﬁcation ofY, the points ofZ\U are all rational over the base ﬁeld
kZ of Z, z∈(Z\U)(kZ) — via the technique of Proposition 1.4, (ii).
(c) For U ⊆Y ⊆Z as in (b), one constructs the subgroup
PU ⊆H1(ΠU, μ ˆZ(ΠU))
determined by thecuspidal principal divisorsvia the isomorphisms of
(b) and the characterization of principal divisors given in Proposition 1.6,
(ii) [cf. also the decomposition groups of (a); Proposition 1.6, (iii)].
(d) For U ⊆Y ⊆Z, kZ as in (b), one constructs the subgroups
k
×
NF ⊆K×
ZNF ↪→lim−→V
H1(ΠV , μ ˆZ(ΠU))
—w h e r eV ranges over the open subschemes obtained by removing ﬁnite
collections of NF-points fromZ ×kZ k′,f o rk′ a ﬁnite extension of kZ;
ΠV
def
= π1(V); KZNF is the function ﬁeld of the curve ZNF obtained by

38 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
descending Z ×kZ k to kNF;t h e“↪→” arises from theKummer map
— via the subgroups of (c) and the characterizations of Kummer classes
of nonconstant NF-rational functions and NF-constants given in
Proposition 1.8, (i), (ii) [cf. also the decomposition groups of (a)].
(e) One constructs theadditive structureon
k
×
NF
⋃
{0}; K×
ZNF
⋃
{0}
[notation as in (d)] by applying the functorial algorithm of Proposition 1.3
to the data of the form described in Proposition 1.3, (a), (b), (c), arising
from the construction of (d) [cf. also the decomposition groups of (a), the
isomorphisms of (b)].
Finally, the asserted “functoriality” is with respect toarbitrary open injective
homomorphisms of extensions of proﬁnite groups [cf. also Remark 1.10.1 below],
as well as with respect to homomorphisms of extensions of proﬁnite groups arising
from abase-change of the base ﬁeld[i.e., k].
Proof. The validity of the algorithm asserted in Theorem 1.9 is immediate from
the various results cited in the statement of this algorithm.⃝
Remark 1.9.1. When k is an MLF [cf. [Mzk20],§0], one veriﬁes immediately
that one may give atempered versionof Theorem 1.9 [cf. [Mzk21], Remark 3.7.1], in
which the proﬁnite ´etale fundamental group ΠX is replaced by thetempered funda-
mental groupof X [and the expression “proﬁnite group” is replaced by “topological
group”].
Remark 1.9.2. When k is an MLF or NF [cf. [Mzk20],§0], the “extension of
proﬁnite groups 1→ΔX →ΠX →Gk →1” that appears in the input data for
the algorithm of Theorem 1.9 may be replaced by the singleproﬁnite group ΠX
[cf. [Mzk20], Theorem 2.6, (v), (vi)]. A similar remark applies in thetemperedcase
discussed in Remark 1.9.1.
Remark 1.9.3. Note that unlike the case withkNF, KZNF, the algorithm of
Theorem 1.9 doesnot furnish a means for reconstructingk, KZ in general — cf.
Corollary 1.10 below concerning the case whenk is anMLF.
Remark 1.9.4. Suppose thatk is anMLF.T h e nGk,w h i c hi so fcohomological
dimension 2 [cf. [NSW], Theorem 7.1.8, (i)], may be thought of as havingone rigid
dimension and one non-rigid dimension. Indeed, themaximal unramiﬁed quotient
Gk ↠ Gunr
k ∼= ˆZ
is generated by theFrobenius element, which may be characterized by an entirely
group-theoretic algorithm[hence is preserved by isomorphisms of absolute Galois
groups of MLF’s — cf. [Mzk9], Proposition 1.2.1, (iv)]; thus, this quotientGk ↠

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 39
Gunr
k ∼= ˆZ may be thought of as a “rigid dimension”. On the other hand, the
dimension ofGk represented by theinertia groupin
Ik ⊆Gk
[which, as is well-known, is of cohomological dimension 1] is“far from rigid”—
a phenomenon that may be seen, for instance, in the existence [cf., e.g., [NSW],
the Closing Remark preceding Theorem 12.2.7] of isomorphisms of absolute Galois
groups of MLF’s whichfail [equivalently — cf. [Mzk20], Corollary 3.7] to be“RF-
preserving”, “uniformly toral”,o r “geometric”. By contrast, it is interesting to
observe that:
The “group-theoretic” algorithm of Theorem 1.9 shows that the condition
of being“coupled withΔ
X”[i.e., via the extension determined by ΠX]h a s
the eﬀect ofrigidifying both of the2 dimensions ofGk [cf. also Corollary
1.10 below].
This point of view will be of use in our development of thearchimedean theoryin
§2 below [cf., e.g., Remark 2.7.3 below].
Remark 1.9.5.
(i) Note that thefunctoriality with respect to isomorphismsof the algorithm
of Theorem 1.9 may be regarded as yielding anew proofof the“proﬁnite absolute
version of the Grothendieck Conjecture over number ﬁelds”[cf., e.g., [Mzk15], The-
orem 3.4] that doesnot logically depend on the theorem of Neukirch-Uchida[cf.,
e.g., [Mzk15], Theorem 3.1]. Moreover, to the author’s knowledge:
ThetechniqueofTheorem1.9yieldstheﬁrstlogicallyindependentproofof
a consequence of the theorem of Neukirch-Uchida that involves anexplicit
construction of the number ﬁeldsinvolved.
Put another way, the algorithm of Theorem 1.9 yields a proof of a consequence of
the theorem of Neukirch-Uchida onnumber ﬁeldsin the style of Uchida’s work on
function ﬁelds in positive characteristic[i.e., [Uchi]] — cf., especially, Proposition
1.3.
(ii) One aspect of the theorem of Neukirch-Uchida is that its proof relies es-
sentially on the data arising from thedecomposition of primesin ﬁnite extensions
of a number ﬁeld — i.e., in other words, on the“global address”of a prime among
all the primes of a number ﬁeld. Such a “global address” is manifestlyannihilated
by the operation oflocalization at the primeunder consideration. In particular,
the crucial functoriality of Theorem 1.9 with respect tochange of base ﬁeld[e.g.,
from a number ﬁeld to a nonarchimedean completion of the number ﬁeld] is an-
other reﬂection of the way in which the nature of the proof of Theorem 1.9 over
number ﬁelds diﬀers quite fundamentally from theessentially global proof of the
theorem of Neukirch-Uchida [cf. also Remark 3.7.6, (iii), (v), below]. This “crucial
functoriality” may also be thought of as a sort ofessential independence of the
algorithms of Theorem 1.9 frombothmethods which are essentiallyglobalin nature

40 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
[such as methods involving the “global address” of a prime]and methods which
are essentially local in nature [such as methods involvingp-adic Hodge theory —
cf. Remark 3.7.6, (iii), (v), below]. This point of view concerning the “essential
independence of the base ﬁeld” is developed further in Remark 1.9.7 below.
Remark 1.9.6. By combining the theory of the present§1w i t ht h et h e o r y
of [Mzk21], §1 [cf., e.g., [Mzk21], Corollary 1.11 and its proof], one may obtain
“functorial group-theoretic reconstruction algorithms”, in a number of cases, for
ﬁnite ´etale coverings ofconﬁguration spacesassociated to hyperbolic curves. We
leave the routine details to the interested reader.
Remark 1.9.7. One way to think of the construction algorithm in Theorem 1.9
of the “NF-portion of the function ﬁeld” of a hyperbolic orbicurve of strictly Belyi
type over a sub-p-adic ﬁeld is the following:
The algorithm of Theorem 1.9 may be thought of as a sort ofcomplete
“combinatorialization”— independent of the base ﬁeld! — of the
[algebro-geometric object constituted by the] orbicurve under considera-
tion.
This sort of“combinatorialization”may be thought of as being in a similar vein
— albeit much more technically complicated! — to the“combinatorialization”of a
category of ﬁnite ´etale coverings of a connected scheme via the notion of anabstract
Galois category,o rt h e“combinatorialization”of certain aspects of the commutative
algebra of “normal rings with toral singularities” via theabstract monoids that
appear in the theory of log regular schemes [cf. also the Introduction of [Mzk16]
for more on this point of view].
Remark 1.9.8. Typically in discussions of anabelian geometry, the term“group-
theoretic”is applied to a property or construction that ispreservedby theisomor-
phisms [or homomorphisms] of fundamental groupsunder consideration [cf., e.g.,
[Mzk5]]. By contrast, our use of this term is intended in astronger sense.T h a ti s
to say:
We use the term“group-theoretic algorithm”to mean that the algorithm
in question is phrased inlanguage that only depends on thetopological
group structureof the fundamental group under consideration.
[Thus, the more “classical” use [e.g., in [Mzk5]] of the term “group-theoretic” cor-
responds, in our discussion of “group-theoretic algorithms”, to thefunctoriality —
e.g., with respect to isomorphisms of some type — of the algorithm.] In particu-
lar, one fundamental diﬀerence between the approach usually taken to anabelian
geometry and the approach taken in the present paper is the following:
The “classical” approach to anabelian geometry, which we shall refer
to as bi-anabelian, centers around acomparison betweentwo geomet-
ric objects[e.g., hyperbolic orbicurves] via their [arithmetic] fundamental

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 41
groups. By contrast, the theory of the present paper, which we shall refer
to as mono-anabelian, centers around the task of establishing“group-
theoretic algorithms”— i.e.,“group-theoreticsoftware”— that require as
input data only the [arithmetic] fundamental group of asingle geometric
object.
Thus, it follows formally that
“mono-anabelian”=⇒ “bi-anabelian”.
On the other hand, if one is allowed in one’s algorithms to introduce someﬁxed
reference model of the geometric object under consideration, then the task of
establishing an “algorithm” may, in eﬀect, bereduced to “comparison with the ﬁxed
reference model”, i.e., reduced to some sort of result in “bi-anabelian geometry”.
T h a ti st os a y ,i fo n ei su n a b l et os e t t l et h ei s s u eo fruling out the use of such
models, then there remains the possibility that
“bi-anabelian”
?
=⇒ “mono-anabelian”.
We shall return to thiscrucial issuein §3 below [cf., especially, Remark 3.7.3].
Remark 1.9.9. As was pointed out to the author byM. Kim, one may also think
of the algorithms of a result such as Theorem 1.9 as suggesting an approach to
solving the problem ofcharacterizing “group-theoretically” those proﬁnite groupsΠ
that occur[i.e., in Theorem 1.9]as a “ΠX”. That is to say, one may try to obtain
such a characterization by starting with, say, an arbitrary slim proﬁnite group Π
and then proceeding to impose“group-theoretic” conditionson Π corresponding to
the various steps of the algorithms of Theorems 1.9 — i.e., conditions whose content
consists of minimal assumptions on Π that are necessary in order to execute each
step of the algorithm.
Corollary 1.10. (Reconstruction of the Function Field for MLF’s) Let
X be ahyperbolic orbicurve over an MLF k [cf. [Mzk20], §0]; k an algebraic
closure ofk; kNF ⊆k the algebraic closure ofQ in k;
1→ΔX →ΠX →Gk →1
—w h e r eΠX
def
= π1(X) →Gk
def
= Gal(k/k) denotes the natural surjection of ´etale
fundamental groups [relative to some choice of basepoints], andΔX denotes the
kernel of this surjection — the resultingextension of proﬁnite groups.T h e n :
(i) There exists afunctorial “group-theoretic” algorithmfor reconstruct-
ing thenatural isomorphismH2(Gk, μ ˆZ(Gk))
∼
→ˆZ [cf. (a) below], together with
the natural surjection H1(Gk, μ ˆZ(Gk))
∼
→Gab
k ↠ ˆZ [cf. (b) below] from the
proﬁnite group Gk,a sf o l l o w s :
(a) Write:
μQ/Z(Gk)
def
= lim−→H
(Hab)tors; μ ˆZ(Gk)
def
= Hom(Q/Z, μQ/Z(Gk))

42 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
—w h e r eH ranges over the open subgroups ofGk; the notation “(−)tors”
denotes the torsion subgroup of the abelian group in parentheses; the
arrows of the direct limit are induced by the Verlagerung, or transfer, map
[cf. the discussion preceding [Mzk9], Proposition 1.2.1; the proof of [Mzk9],
Proposition 1.2.1]. [Thus, the underlying module ofμQ/Z(Gk), μ ˆZ(Gk) is
unaﬀectedby the operation of passing fromGk to an open subgroup of
Gk.] Then one constructs thenatural isomorphism
H2(Gk, μ ˆZ(Gk))
∼
→ˆZ
“group-theoretically” fromGk via the algorithm described in the proof of
[Mzk9], Proposition 1.2.1, (vii).
(b) By applying the isomorphism of (a) [and the cup-product in group coho-
mology], one constructs thesurjection
H1(Gk, μ ˆZ(Gk))
∼
→Gab
k ↠ Gunr ∼
→ˆZ
determined by the Frobenius element in themaximal unramiﬁed quo-
tient Gunr of Gk via the “group-theoretic” algorithm described in the proof
of [Mzk9], Proposition 1.2.1, (ii), (iv).
Here, the asserted “functoriality” is with respect toarbitrary injective open
homomorphisms of proﬁnite groups [cf. also Remark 1.10.1, (iii), below].
(ii) By applying thefunctorial “group-theoretic” algorithmof [Mzk20],
Lemma 4.5, (v), to construct the decomposition groups of cusps inΠX,o n eo b -
tains a ΠX-module μ ˆZ(ΠX) as in Proposition 1.4, (ii); Theorem 1.9, (b) [cf. also
Remark 1.10.1, (ii), below]. Then there exists afunctorial “group-theoretic”
algorithm for reconstructing thenatural isomorphism μ ˆZ(Gk)
∼
→μ ˆZ(ΠX) [cf.
(c) below; Remark 1.10.1 below] and the image of a certainKummer map [cf.
(d) below] from theproﬁnite group ΠX [cf. Remark 1.9.2], as follows:
(c) One constructs thenatural isomorphism[cf., e.g., [Mzk12], Theorem
4.3]
μ ˆZ(Gk)
∼
→μ ˆZ(ΠX)
— thought of as an element of the quotient
H1(Gk, μ ˆZ(ΠX)) ↠ Hom(μ ˆZ(Gk), μ ˆZ(ΠX))
determined by the surjection of (b) — as theunique topological genera-
tor of Hom(μ ˆZ(Gk), μ ˆZ(ΠX)) that is contained in the“positive rational
structure”[arising from variousJab,f o rJ ⊆ΔX an open subgroup] of
[Mzk9], Lemma 2.5, (i) [cf. also [Mzk9], Lemma 2.5, (ii)].
(d) One constructs the image of theKummer map
k× ↪→H1(Gk, μ ˆZ(ΠX)) ↪→H1(ΠX, μ ˆZ(ΠX))

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 43
as the inverse image of the subgroup generated by the Frobenius element
via the surjection H1(Gk, μ ˆZ(ΠX))
∼
→H1(Gk, μ ˆZ(Gk))
∼
→Gab
k ↠ ˆZ of
(b) [cf. also the isomorphism of (c)].
(d′) Alternatively, ifX is of strictly Belyi type[so that we are in the situ-
ation of Theorem 1.9], then one may construct the image of the Kummer
map of (d) —without applying the isomorphism of (c) — as thecom-
pletion of H1(Gk, μ ˆZ(ΠX)) ⋂k
×
NF [cf. Theorem 1.9, (e)] with respect to
the valuation on the ﬁeld(H1(Gk, μ ˆZ(ΠX)) ⋂k
×
NF) ⋃{0} [relative to the
additive structure of Theorem 1.9, (e)] determined by thesubring of this
ﬁeld generated by the intersectionKer(H1(Gk, μ ˆZ(ΠX)) ↠ ˆZ) ⋂k
×
NF —
where “↠” is the surjection of (b), consideredup tomultiplication byˆZ×,
an object which isindependent of the isomorphism of (c).
Here, the asserted “functoriality” is with respect toarbitrary open injective
homomorphisms of extensions of proﬁnite groups — cf. Remark 1.10.1 below.
(iii) Suppose further thatX is of strictly Belyi type[so that we are in the
situation of Theorem 1.9]. Then there exists a functorial “group-theoretic”
algorithm for reconstructing the function ﬁeld KX of X from the proﬁnite
group ΠX [cf. Remark 1.9.2], as follows:
(e) One constructs the decomposition groups in ΠX of arbitrary closed
points of X by approximating such points by NF-points ofX [whose
decomposition groups have already been constructed, in Theorem 1.9, (a)],
via the equivalence of [Mzk12], Lemma 3.1, (i), (iv).
(f) For S a ﬁnite set of closed points ofX, one constructs the associated
“maximal abelian cuspidalization”
Πc-ab
US
of US
def
= X\S via the algorithm of [Mzk19], Theorem 2.1, (i) [cf. also
[Mzk19], Theorem 1.1, (iii), as well as Remark 1.10.4, below]. Moreover,
by applying theapproximation technique of (e) to theBelyi cuspidal-
izations of Theorem 1.9, (a), one may construct theGreen’s trivial-
izations [cf. [Mzk19], Deﬁnition 2.1; [Mzk19], Remark 15] for arbitrary
pairs of closed points ofX such that one point of the pair is an NF-point;
in particular, one may construct theliftings to Πc-ab
US [from ΠX]o fd e -
composition groups of NF-points.
(g) By applying the “maximal abelian cuspidalizations”Πc-ab
US of (f), together
with the characterization of principal divisors given in Proposition 1.6, (ii)
[cf. also the decomposition groups of (e)], one constructs the subgroup
PUS ⊆H1(Πc-ab
US , μ ˆZ(ΠX)) (∼= H1(ΠUS , μ ˆZ(ΠX)))
[cf. [Mzk19], Proposition 2.1, (i), (ii)] determined by thecuspidal prin-
cipal divisors via the isomorphisms of Theorem 1.9, (b). Then the

44 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
image of the Kummer map in PUS may be constructed as the collec-
tion of elements ofPUS whose restriction∈H1(Gk′, μ ˆZ(ΠX)) —w h e r e
Gk′ ⊆Gk is an open subgroup corresponding to a ﬁnite extensionk′ ⊆k
of k — to a decomposition group of some NF-point [cf. (f)] is contained
in (k′)× ⊆((k′)×)∧ ∼
→H1(Gk′, μ ˆZ(ΠX)) [cf. (d) or, alternatively,(d’)].
(h) One constructs theadditive structureon [the image — cf. (d) — of]
k× ⋃{0} as theunique continuous extensionof the additive structure
on (k× ⋂k
×
NF) ⋃{0} constructed in Theorem 1.9, (e). One constructs the
image of theKummer map
K×
X ↪→lim−→S
H1(Πc-ab
US , μ ˆZ(ΠX))
by letting S as in (g) vary. One constructs theadditive structure on
K×
X
⋃{0} as the unique additive structure compatible, relative to the oper-
ation of restriction to decomposition groups of NF-points [cf. (f)], with the
additive structures on the various(k′)× ⋃{0},f o rk′ ⊆k a ﬁnite exten-
sion ofk. Also, one may construct the restrictions of elements ofK×
X to
decomposition groups not only of NF-points, but also ofarbitrary closed
points of X,b y approximating as in (e); this allows one [by lettingk
vary among ﬁnite extensions ofk in k] to give an alternative construction
of the additive structure onK×
X
⋃{0} by applying Proposition 1.3directly
[i.e., overk, as opposed tokNF].
Here, the asserted “functoriality” is with respect toarbitrary open injective
homomorphisms of proﬁnite groups [i.e., of “ΠX”] — cf. Remark 1.10.1 below.
Proof. The validity of the algorithms asserted in Corollary 1.10 is immediate from
the various results cited in the statement of these algorithms.⃝
Remark 1.10.1.
(i) In general, thefunctoriality of Theorem 1.9, Corollary 1.10, when applied to
the operation of passing toopen subgroupsof ΠX, is to be understood in the sense
of a “compatibility”, relative todividing the usual functorially induced morphism
on “μ ˆZ(ΠX)’s” by afactor given by theindex of the subgroups of ΔX that arise
from the open subgroups of ΠX under consideration [cf., e.g., [Mzk19], Remark 1].
(ii) In fact, strictly speaking, the deﬁnition of “μ ˆZ(ΠU)” in Theorem 1.9, (b),
is only valid ifU is a hyperbolic curve of genus≥2; nevertheless, one mayextend
this deﬁnition to the case whereU is an arbitrary hyperbolic orbicurve precisely
by passing to coverings and applying the “functoriality/compatibility” discussed in
(i). We leave the routine details to the reader.
(iii) In a similar vein, note that the isomorphism H2(Gk, μ ˆZ(Gk))
∼
→ ˆZ of
Corollary 1.10, (a), isfunctorial in the sense that it iscompatiblewith the result of
dividing the usual functorially induced morphism by afactor given by theindex of
the open subgroups ofGk under consideration.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 45
Remark 1.10.2. Just as was the case with Theorem 1.9, one may give atempered
version of Corollary 1.10 — cf. Remark 1.9.1.
Remark 1.10.3.
(i) The isomorphism of Corollary 1.10, (c), may be thought of as a sort of
“synchronization of [arithmetic and geometric] cyclotomes”, in the style of the
“synchronization of cyclotomes” given in the ﬁnal display of Proposition 1.4, (ii).
(ii) One may construct thenatural isomorphism
Gab
k
∼
→H1(Gk, μ ˆZ(ΠX))
by applying the displayed isomorphism of Corollary 1.10, (c), to the inverse of the
ﬁrst displayed isomorphism of Corollary 1.10, (b). By applying this natural isomor-
phism to various open subgroups ofGk, we thus obtain yet anotherisomorphism
of cyclotomes
μ ˆZ(Gk)
∼
→μκ
ˆZ(ΠX)
def
= Hom(Q/Z,κ(k
×
NF))
—w h e r ew ew r i t eκ(k
×
NF) for the image ofk
×
NF
in
lim−→V
H1(ΠV , μ ˆZ(ΠU))
via the inclusion induced by theKummer mapin the display of Theorem 1.9, (d).
Remark 1.10.4. Here, wetaketheopportunitytocorrectanunfortunatemisprint
in the proof of [Mzk19], Theorem 1.1, (iii). The phrase “ Z′
X →X, Z′
Y →Y
are diagonal coverings” that appears at the beginning of this proof should read
“Z′
X →X×X, Z′
Y →Y ×Y are diagonal coverings”.
Finally, we conclude the present§1 by observing that the techniques developed
in the present§1 may be intepreted as implying avery elementary semi-absolute
birational analogueof Theorem 1.9.
Theorem 1.11. (Semi-absolute Reconstruction of Function Fields of
Curves over Kummer-faithful Fields)LetX be a smooth, proper, geometrically
connectedcurve of genus gX over aKummer-faithful ﬁeld k; KX the function
ﬁeld of X; ηX
def
= Spec(KX); k an algebraic closure ofk;
1→ΔηX →ΠηX →Gk →1
—w h e r eΠηX
def
= π1(ηX)→Gk
def
= Gal(k/k) denotes the natural surjection of ´etale
fundamental groups [relative to some choice of basepoints], andΔηX denotes the
kernel of this surjection — the resultingextension of proﬁnite groups.T h e n
ΔηX , ΠηX ,a n dGk are slim. For simplicity, let us suppose further [for instance,
by replacing X by a ﬁnite ´etale covering ofX] that gX ≥2. Then there exists a
functorial “group-theoretic” algorithmfor reconstructing thefunction ﬁeld

46 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
KX from theextension of proﬁnite groups 1→ΔηX →ΠηX →Gk →1;t h i s
algorithm consists of the following steps:
(a) Let l be a prime number. If ρ: Gk →Z×
l is a character, and M
is an abelian pro-l group equipped with a continuous action byGk,t h e n
let us writeFρ(M) ⊆M for the closed subgroup topologically generated
by the closed subgroups ofM that are isomorphic toZl(ρ) [i.e., the Gk-
module obtained by lettingGk act on Zl via ρ]a s H-modules, for some
open subgroupH ⊆Gk.[ T h u s ,Fρ(M)⊆M depends only on the “power-
equivalence class” ofρ— cf. Remark 1.5.1.] Then the power-equivalence
class of thecyclotomic character χl : Gk →Z×
l may be characterized
by the condition thatFχl(Δab
ηX ⊗Zl) is not topologically ﬁnitely generated.
(b) Let l be a prime number. IfM is an abelian pro-l group equipped with
a continuous action byGk such that M/Fχl(M) is topologically ﬁnitely
generated, then let us write M ↠ T (M) for the maximal torsion-
free quasi-trivial quotient[i.e., maximal torsion-free quotient on which
Gk acts through a ﬁnite quotient]. [Thus, one veriﬁes immediately that
“T (M)” is well-deﬁned.] Then one may compute thegenus of X via the
formula [cf. the proof of [Mzk21], Corollary 2.10]
2gX =d i mQl(Q(Δab
ηX ⊗Zl)⊗Ql)+dim Ql(T (Δab
ηX ⊗Zl)⊗Ql)
— where we writeQ(−)
def
=( −)/Fχl(−). In particular, this allows one
to characterize, via theHurwitz formula, those pairs of open subgroups
Ji ⊆Hi ⊆ΔηX such that “the covering betweenJi and Hi is cyclic of or-
d e rap o w e ro fl and totally ramiﬁedat precisely one closed point but un-
ramiﬁed elsewhere” [cf. the proof of [Mzk21], Corollary 2.10]. Moreover,
this last characterization implies a“group-theoretic”characterization
of theinertia subgroups Ix ⊆ΔηX of pointsx∈X(k) [cf. the proof of
[Mzk21], Corollary 2.10; the latter portion of the proof of [Mzk9], Lemma
1.3.9], hence of thequotient ΔηX ↠ ΔX [whose kernel is topologically
normally generated by theIx,f o rx∈X(k)]. Finally, thedecomposition
group Dx ⊆ΠηX of x ∈X(k) may then be constructed as the normal-
izer [or, equivalently, commensurator] of Ix in ΠηX [cf., e.g., [Mzk12],
Theorem 1.3, (ii)].
(c) One may construct the natural isomorphisms Ix
∼
→MX [where x∈
X(k); MX is as in Proposition 1.4, (ii)] via the technique of Proposition
1.4, (ii). These isomorphisms determine [by restriction to theIx] a natural
map
H1(ΠηX ,MX)→
∏
x∈X(k)
ˆZ
[cf. Proposition 1.6, (iii)]. Denote byPηX ⊆H1(ΠηX ,MX) [cf. Proposi-
tion 1.8] the inverse image inH1(ΠηX ,MX) of the subgroup of
∏
x∈X(k)
ˆZ

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 47
consisting of the principal divisors — i.e., divisors D of degree zero
supported on a collection of points∈X(kH),w h e r ekH ⊆k is the subﬁeld
corresponding to an open subgroupH ⊆Gk, whose associated class ∈
H1(H,Δab
X ) [i.e., the class obtained as the diﬀerence between the section
“tD” of Proposition 1.6, (ii), and the identity section] istrivial.
(d) The image of theKummer map
K×
X →H1(ΠηX ,MX)
may be constructed as the subgroup generated by elementsθ∈PηX for
which there exists anx ∈X(k) such that θ|x ∈H1(Dx,MX) vanishes
[i.e., =1 , if one works multiplicatively] — cf. the technique of Proposition
1.8, (i). Moreover, theadditive structureon K×
X
⋃{0} may be recovered
via the algorithm of Proposition 1.3.
Finally, the asserted “functoriality” is with respect toarbitrary open injective
homomorphisms of extensions of proﬁnite groups [cf. Remark 1.10.1, (i)].
Proof. The slimness of ΔηX follows immediately from the argument applied to
verify the slimness portion of [Mzk21], Corollary 2.10. The validity of the recon-
struction algorithm asserted in Theorem 1.11 is immediate from the various results
cited in the statement of this algorithm. Now, by applying thefunctoriality of this
algorithm, the slimness of Gk follows immediately from the argument applied in
[Mzk5], Lemma 15.8, to verify the slimness ofGk when k is sub-p-adic. Finally, the
slimness of ΠηX follows from the slimness of ΔηX , Gk. ⃝
Remark 1.11.1.
(i) One veriﬁes immediately that whenk is an MLF,t h esemi-absolute algo-
rithms of Theorem 1.11 may be renderedabsolute [i.e., one may construct the kernel
of the quotient “ΠηX ↠ Gk”] by applying thealgorithm that is implicit in the proof
of the corresponding portion of [Mzk21], Corollary 2.10.
(ii) Suppose, in the notation of Theorem 1.11 thatk is anNF.T h e na nabsolute
version of the functoriality portion [i.e., the “Grothendieck Conjecture” portion]
of Theorem 1.11 is proven in [Pop] [cf. [Pop], Theorem 2]. Moreover, in [Pop],
Observation [and the following discussion], analgorithm is given for passing from
the absolute data “ΠηX ”t ot h esemi-absolute data “(ΠηX ,ΔηX ⊆ΠηX )”. Thus,
by combining this algorithm of [Pop] with Theorem 1.11, one obtains anabsolute
version of Theorem 1.11.
Remark 1.11.2. One may think of the argument used to prove theslimness of
Gk in the proof of Theorem 1.11 [i.e., the argument of the proof of [Mzk5], Lemma
15.8] as beingsimilar in spiritto the proof [cf., e.g., [Mzk9], Theorem 1.1.1, (ii)] of
the slimness ofGk via local class ﬁeld theoryin the case wherek is anMLF,a sw e l l
as to the proof of the slimness of the geometric fundamental group of a hyperbolic
curve given, for instance, in [MT], Proposition 1.4, via the induced action on the

48 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
t o r s i o np o i n t so ft h eJacobian of the curve, in which the curve may be embedded.
That is to say, in the case wherek is anarbitrary Kummer-faithful ﬁeld, since one
does not have an analogue of local class ﬁeld theory (respectively, of the embedding
of a curve in its Jacobian), themoduli of hyperbolic curves overk, in the context
of arelative anabelian result for the arithmetic fundamental groups of such curves,
plays the role of theabelianization ofGk (respectively, of the torsion points of the
Jacobian) in the case wherek is an MLF (respectively, in the case of the geometric
fundamental group of a hyperbolic curve) — i.e., the role of a“functorial, group-
theoretically reconstructible embedding”of k (respectively, the curve).
Remark 1.11.3. It is interesting to note that the techniques that appear in the
algorithms of Theorem 1.11 areextremely elementary. For instance, unlike the case
with Theorem 1.9, Corollary 1.10, the algorithms of Theorem 1.11do not dependon
the somewhat diﬃcult [e.g., in their use ofp-adic Hodge theory] results of [Mzk5].
Put another way, this elementary nature of Theorem 1.11 serves to highlight the
fact that the only non-elementary portion [in the sense of its dependence of the
results of [Mzk5]] of the algorithms of Theorem 1.9 is the use of the technique of
Belyi cuspidalizations. It is precisely this “non-elementary portion” of Theorem 1.9
that requires us, in Theorem 1.9, to assume that the base ﬁeld issub-p-adic [i.e.,
as opposed to merelyKummer-faithful, as in Theorem 1.11].
Remark 1.11.4.
(i) The observation of Remark 1.11.3 prompts the following question:
Ifthe birationalversion[i.e., Theorem1.11]ofTheorem1.9issomuchmore
elementary than Theorem 1.9, then what is theadvantage [i.e., relative to
the anabelian geometry of function ﬁelds] of considering the anabelian
geometry of hyperbolic curves?
One key advantage of working with hyperbolic curves, in the context of the theory
of the present paper, lies in the fact that “most” hyperbolic curves admit acore
[cf. [Mzk3], §3; [Mzk10], §2]. Moreover, the existence of “cores” at the level of
schemes has a tendency to imply to existence of “cores” at the level of “´etale
fundamental groups considered geometrically”, i.e., at the level ofanabelioids [cf.
[Mzk11], §3.1]. The existence of a core is crucial to, for instance, the theory of
the ´etale theta function given in [Mzk18], §1, §2, and, moreover, in the present
three-part series, plays an important role in the theory ofelliptically admissible[cf.
[Mzk21], Deﬁnition 3.1] hyperbolic orbicurves. On the other hand, it is easy to see
that “function ﬁelds do not admit cores”: i.e., if, in the notation of Theorem 1.11,
we write Loc(ηX) for the category whoseobjects are connected schemes that admit
a connected ﬁnite ´etale covering which is also a connected ﬁnite ´etale covering of
ηX, and whose morphisms are the ﬁnite ´etale morphisms, then Loc(ηX) fails to
admit a terminal object.
(ii) The observation of (i) is interesting in the context of the theory of§5
below, in which we apply various [mono-]anabelian results to construct“canonical
rigid integral structures”called “log-shells”. Indeed, in the Introduction to

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 49
[Mzk11], it is explained, via analogy to the complex analytic theory of the upper
half-plane, howthenotionofa coremaybethoughtofasasortof “canonical integral
structure”— i.e., relative to the “modiﬁcations of integral structure” constituted
by “going up and down via various ﬁnite ´etale coverings”. Here, it is interesting
to note that this idea of a “canonical integral structure relative to going up and
down via ﬁnite ´etale coverings” may also be seen in the theory surrounding the
property of cyclotomic rigidity in the context of the´etale theta function[cf., e.g.,
[Mzk18], Remark 2.19.3]. Moreover, let us observe that these “integral structures
with respect to ﬁnite ´etale coverings” may be thought of as“exponentiated integral
structures”— i.e., in the sense that, for instance, in the case ofGm over Q, these
integral structures are not integral structures relative to the scheme-theoretic base
ring Z⊆Q, but rather with respect to theexponent of the standard coordinateU,
which, via multiplication by various nonnegative integersN, gives rise, in the form
ofmappings Un ↦→UN·n, tovariousﬁnite´etalecoveringsof Gm. Such“non-scheme-
theoretic exponentiated copies ofZ”play an important role in the theory of the
´etale theta function as the Galois group of a certain natural inﬁnite ´etale covering
of the Tate curve — cf. the discussion of [Mzk18], Remark 2.16.2. Moreover, the
idea of constructing “canonical integral structures” by “de-exponentiating certain
exponentiated integral structures” may be rephrased as the idea of “constructing
canonical integral structures by applying some sort oflogarithm operation”. From
this point of view, such “canonical integral structures with respect to ﬁnite ´etale
coverings” are quite reminiscent of thecanonical integral structures arising from
log-shells to be constructed in§5b e l o w .
Remark 1.11.5. In the context of the discussion of Remark 1.11.4, if the hyper-
bolic curve in question isaﬃne, then, relative to thefunction ﬁeldof the curve, the
additional data necessary to determine the given aﬃne hyperbolic curve consists
precisely of some [nonempty] ﬁnite collection of conjugacy classes ofinertia groups
[i.e., “Ix” as in Theorem 11.1, (b)]. Thus, from the point of view of the discussion
of Remark 1.11.3, the technique ofBelyi cuspidalizationsis applied precisely so as
to enable one to work with thisadditional data[cf. also the discussion of Remark
3.7.7 below].

50 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Section 2: Archimedean Reconstruction Algorithms
In the present§2, we re-examine various aspects of thecomplex analyticthe-
ory of [Mzk14] from analgorithm-based, “model-implicit”[cf. Remark 2.7.4 below]
point of view motivated by theGalois-theoretic theory of§1. More precisely, the
“SL2(R)-based approach”of [Mzk14], §1, may be seen in the general theory of
Aut-holomorphic spacesgiven in Proposition 2.2, Corollary 2.3, while the“paral-
lelograms, rectangles, squares approach”of [Mzk14],§2, is developed further in the
reconstruction algorithms of Propositions 2.5, 2.6. These two approaches are com-
bined to obtain the main result of the present§2 [cf. Corollary 2.7], which consists
of a certain reconstruction algorithm for the“local linear holomorphic structure”
of an Aut-holomorphic orbispace arising from anelliptically admissible hyperbolic
orbicurve. Finally, in Corollaries 2.8, 2.9, we consider the relationship between
Corollary 2.7 and theglobal portionof the Galois-theoretic theory of§1.
The following deﬁnition will play an important role in the theory of the present
§2.
Deﬁnition 2.1.
(i) Let X be a Riemann surface[i.e., a complex manifold of dimension one].
WriteAX for the assignment that assigns to each connected open subsetU ⊆X
the group
AX(U)
def
=A u thol(U)
of holomorphic automorphisms of U — which we think of as being “some distin-
guished subgroup” of the group of self-homeomorphisms Aut(Utop) of the under-
lying topological spaceUtop of U. We shall refer to as the Aut-holomorphic space
associated toX the pair
X
def
=( Xtop,AX)
consisting of theunderlying topological spaceXtop def
= Xtop of X, together with the
assignmentAX
def
= AX; also, we shall refer to the assignmentAX =AX as the Aut-
holomorphic structure on Xtop = Xtop [determined by X]. If X is biholomorphic
to the open unit disc, then we shall refer toX as an Aut-holomorphic disc.I f X
is a hyperbolic Riemann surface of ﬁnite type (respectively, a hyperbolic Riemann
surface of ﬁnite type associated to an elliptically admissible [cf. [Mzk21], Deﬁnition
3.1] hyperbolic curve overC), then we shall refer to the Aut-holomorphic spaceX as
hyperbolic of ﬁnite type(respectively, elliptically admissible). IfU is a collection of
connected open subsets ofX that forms abasisfor the topology ofX and, moreover,
satisﬁes the condition that any connected open subset ofX that is contained in an
element ofU is itself an element ofU, then we shall refer toU as alocal structure
on Xtop and to therestrictionAX|U ofAX toU as a[U-local] pre-Aut-holomorphic
structure on Xtop.
(ii) Let X (respectively, Y)b ea Riemann surface; X (respectively, Y)t h e
Aut-holomorphic space associated to X (respectively, Y); U (respectively, V)a
local structureon Xtop (respectively, Ytop). Then we shall refer to as a (U,V)-local
morphism ofAut-holomorphic spaces
φ: X→Y

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 51
any local isomorphism of topological spacesφtop : Xtop →Ytop with the property
that for any open subsetUX ∈Uthat mapshomeomorphically via φtop onto some
open subset UY ∈V, φtop induces a bijectionAX(UX)
∼
→AY(UY); whenU, V are,
respectively, the sets of all connected open subsets ofX, Y, then we shall omit
the word “(U,V)-local” from this terminology; whenφtop is a ﬁnite covering space
map, we shall say thatφis ﬁnite ´etale. We shall refer to a mapX →Y which is
either holomorphic or anti-holomorphic at each point ofX as anRC-holomorphic
morphism [cf. [Mzk14], Deﬁnition 1.1, (vi)].
(iii) LetZ, Z′ be orientable topological surfaces[i.e., two-manifolds]. Ifp∈Z,
then let us write
Orn(Z,p)
def
= lim−→W
π1(W\{p})ab
—w h e r eW ranges over the connected open neighborhoodsof p in Z;“ π1(−)”
denotes the usual topological fundamental group, relative to some basepoint [so
“π1(−)” is only deﬁned up toinner automorphisms, an indeterminacy which may
be eliminated by passing to theabelianization “ab”]; thus, Orn(Z,p)i s[noncanon-
ically!] isomorphic toZ. Note that sinceZ is orientable, it follows that the assign-
ment p↦→Orn(Z,p) determines atrivial local systemon Z, whose module of global
sections we shall denote by Orn(Z)[ s oO r n (Z) is a direct product of copies ofZ,i n -
dexed by the connected components ofZ]. One veriﬁes immediately that any local
isomorphism Z →Z′ induces a well-deﬁned homomorphism Orn(Z) →Orn(Z′).
We shall say that any two local isomorphismsα,β: Z →Z′ are co-oriented if
they induce thesame homomorphism Orn(Z) →Orn(Z′). We shall refer to as a
pre-co-orientation ζ: Z →Z′ any equivalence classof local isomorphismsZ →Z′
relative to the equivalence relation determined by the property of being co-oriented
[so a pre-co-orientation may be thought of as acollection of mapsZ →Z′, or, al-
ternatively, as ahomomorphism Orn(Z)→Orn(Z′)]. Thus, the pre-co-orientations
from the open subsets ofZ to Z′ form a pre-sheaf on Z; we shall refer to as a
co-orientation
ζ: Z →Z′
any section of the sheaﬁﬁcation of this pre-sheaf [so a co-orientation may be thought
of as a collection of maps from open subsets of Z to Z′, or, alternatively, as a
homomorphism Orn(Z)→Orn(Z′)].
(iv) LetX, Y, X, Y,U,V be as in (ii). Then we shall say that two (U,V)-local
morphisms of Aut-holomorphic spacesφ1,φ2 : X →Y are co-holomorphic if φtop
1
and φtop
2 are co-oriented [cf. (iii)]. We shall refer to as apre-co-holomorphicization
ζ: X →Y any equivalence class of (U,V)-local morphisms of Aut-holomorphic
spaces X →Y relative to the equivalence relation determined by the property
of being co-holomorphic [so a pre-co-holomorphicization may be thought of as a
collection of mapsfrom Xtop to Ytop]. Thus, the pre-co-holomorphicizations from
the Aut-holomorphic spaces determined by open subsets ofXtop to Y form apre-
sheaf on Xtop; we shall refer to as aco-holomorphicization [cf. also Remark 2.3.2
below]
ζ: X→Y
any section of the sheaﬁﬁcation of this pre-sheaf [so a co-holomorphicization may
be thought of as acollection of mapsfrom open subsets ofXtop to Ytop]. Finally, we

52 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
observe that every co-holomorphicization (respectively, pre-co-holomorphicization)
determines aco-orientation (pre-co-orientation) between the underlying topological
spaces.
Remark 2.1.1. One veriﬁes immediately that there is a natural extension of
the notions of Deﬁnition 2.1 to the case ofRiemann orbisurfaces,w h i c hg i v er i s e
to “Aut-holomorphic orbispaces”[not to be confused with the “orbi-objects” of§0,
which will always be identiﬁable in the present paper by means of thehyphen “-”
following the preﬁx “orbi”]. Here, we understand the term “Riemann orbisurface”
to refer to a one-dimensional complex analytic stack which islocally isomorphic
to the complex analytic stack obtained by forming thestack-theoretic quotientof
a Riemann surface [i.e., a one-dimensional complex manifold] by aﬁnite group of
[holomorphic] automorphisms[of the Riemann surface]. In particular, a “Riemann
orbiface” is necessarily a Riemann surface over the complement, in the “coarse
space” associated to the orbisurface, of somediscrete closed subset.
Remark 2.1.2. One important aspect of the“Aut-holomorphic”approach to the
notion of a“holomorphic structure”is that this approach has the virtue of being
free of any mention of some“ﬁxed reference model”copy of the ﬁeld of complex
numbers C — cf. Remark 2.7.4 below.
Proposition 2.2. (Commensurable Terminality of RC-Holomorphic
Automorphisms of the Disc) Let X, Y be Aut-holomorphic discs, arising,
respectively, from Riemann surfacesX, Y.T h e n :
(i) Everyisomorphism of Aut-holomorphic spaces X
∼
→Y arises from a
unique RC-holomorphic isomorphismX
∼
→Y.
(ii) Let us regard the groupAut(Xtop) as equipped with thecompact-open
topology. Then the subgroup
AutRC-hol(X)⊆Aut(Xtop)
of RC-holomorphic automorphisms of X, which [as is well-known] contains
Authol(X) as a subgroup of index two, isclosed and commensurably terminal
[cf. [Mzk20],§0]. Moreover, we haveisomorphisms of topological groups
Authol(X)∼= SL2(R)/{±1};A u tRC-hol(X)∼= GL2(R)/R×
[where we regardAuthol(X), AutRC-hol(X), as equipped with the topology induced
by the topology ofAut(Xtop), i.e., thecompact-open topology].
Proof. It is immediate from the deﬁnitions that assertion (i) follows formally
from thecommensurable terminality[in fact, in this situation,normal terminality
suﬃces] of assertion (ii). Thus, it suﬃces to verify assertion (ii). First, we recall
that we have a naturalisomorphism of connected topological groups
Authol(X)∼= SL2(R)/{±1}

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 53
[where we regard Authol(X) as equipped with thecompact-open topology]. Next,
let us recall the well-known fact in elementary complex analysis that“a sequence
of holomorphic functions on Xtop that converges uniformly on compact subsets
of Xtop converges to a holomorphic function on Xtop”. [This fact is often ap-
p l i e di np r o o f so ft h eRiemann mapping theorem.] This fact implies immedi-
ately that Authol(X), AutRC-hol(X)a r eclosed in Aut(Xtop). Now suppose that
α∈Aut(Xtop) lies in thecommensurator of Authol(X); thus, the intersection (α·
Authol(X)·α−1) ⋂Authol(X) is a closed subgroup of ﬁnite index of Authol(X). But
thisimpliesthat( α·Authol(X)·α−1) ⋂Authol(X)isanopensubgroupofAut hol(X),
hence [since Authol(X)i s connected]t h a t(α· Authol(X) · α−1) ⋂Authol(X)=
Authol(X), i.e., that α· Authol(X)· α−1 ⊇Authol(X). Thus, by replacing αby
α−1, we conclude thatαnormalizes Authol(X), i.e., thatαinduces an automor-
phism of the topological group Authol(X)∼= SL2(R)/{±1}, hence also [byCartan’s
theorem— cf., e.g., [Serre], Chapter V,§9, Theorem 2; the proof of [Mzk14], Lemma
1.10] of thereal analytic Lie groupSL2(R)/{±1}. Thus, as is well-known, it fol-
lows [for instance, by considering the action ofαon the Borel subalgebrasof the
complexiﬁcation of the Lie algebra ofSL2(R)/{±1}]t h a tαarises from an element
of GL2(C)/C× that ﬁxes [relative to the action by conjugation] the Lie subalgebra
sl2(R)o f sl2(C). But such an element ofGL2(C)/C× is easily veriﬁed to be an
element ofGL2(R)/R×. In particular, by considering the action ofαon maximal
compact subgroupsof Authol(X) [cf. the proof of [Mzk14], Lemma 1.10], it follows
that αarises from anRC-holomorphic automorphismof X, as desired.⃝
In fact, as the following result shows, the notions of an Aut-holomorphic struc-
ture and apre-Aut-holomorphic structureare equivalent to one another, as well as
to the usual notion of a“holomorphic structure”.
Corollary 2.3. (Morphisms of Aut-Holomorphic Spaces) Let X (respec-
tively, Y) be a Riemann surface;X (respectively, Y)t h eAut-holomorphic space
associated toX (respectively,Y); U (respectively,V) a local structure onXtop (re-
spectively, Ytop). Then:
(i) Every(U,V)-local morphism ofAut-holomorphic spaces
φ: X→Y
arises from a unique´etale RC-holomorphic morphismψ: X →Y. Moreover,
if, in this situation,X, Y [i.e., Xtop, Ytop]a r econnected, then there existpre-
cisely two co-holomorphicizationsX→Y, corresponding to theholomorphic
and anti-holomorphic local isomorphisms from open subsets ofX to Y.
(ii) Every pre-Aut-holomorphic structure on Xtop extends to a unique
Aut-holomorphic structure on Xtop.
Proof. Assertion (i) follows immediately from the deﬁnitions, by applying Propo-
sition 2.2, (i), tosuﬃciently small open discsin Xtop. Assertion (ii) follows im-
mediately from assertion (i) by applying assertion (i) to automorphisms of the
Aut-holomorphic spaces determined by arbitrary connected open subsetsof Xtop
which determine thesame co-holomorphicizationas the identity automorphism.⃝

54 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Remark 2.3.1. Note that Corollary 2.3 may be thought of as one sort of“com-
plex analytic analogue of the Grothendieck Conjecture”, that, although formulated
somewhat diﬀerently, contains [to a substantial extent] thesame essential mathe-
matical contentas [Mzk14], Theorem 1.12 — cf. the similarity between the proofs
of Proposition 2.2 and [Mzk14], Lemma 1.10; the application of thep-adic version
of Cartan’s theoremin the proof of [Mzk8], Theorem 1.1 [i.e., in the proof of [Mzk8],
Lemma 1.3].
Remark 2.3.2. It follows, in particular, from Corollary 2.3, (ii), that [in the
notation of Deﬁnition 2.1, (iv)] the notion of aco-holomorphicization X→Y is, in
fact, independent o ft h ec h o i c eo ft h elocal structuresU, V.
Remark 2.3.3. It follows immediately from Corollary 2.3, (i), that anycomposite
of morphisms of Aut-holomorphic spaces is again amorphism ofAut-holomorphic
spaces.
Corollary 2.4. (Holomorphic Arithmeticity and Cores)LetX be ahyper-
bolic Aut-holomorphic space of ﬁnite type associated to a Riemann surface
X [which is, in turn, determined by a hyperbolic curve overC]. Then one may
determine thearithmeticity [in the sense of [Mzk3],§2] ofX and, whenX is not
arithmetic, construct theAut-holomorphic orbispace [cf. Remark 2.1.1] associated
to thehyperbolic core [cf. [Mzk3], Deﬁnition 3.1] ofX, via the followingfunc-
torial algorithm, which involvesonly the Aut-holomorphic spaceX as input
data:
(a) Let Utop →Xtop be anyuniversal coveringof Xtop [i.e., a connected
covering space of the topological spaceXtop which does not admit any non-
trivial connected covering spaces]. Then one may construct thefunda-
mental groupπ1(Xtop) as the group ofautomorphisms Aut(Utop/Xtop)
of Utop over Xtop.
(b) In the notation of (a), by considering the local structure on Utop
consisting of connected open subsets ofUtop that map isomorphically onto
open subsets ofXtop, one may construct a naturalpre-Aut-holomorphic
structure on Utop — hence also [cf. Corollary 2.3, (ii)] a naturalAut-
holomorphic structure on Utop — by restricting theAut-holomorphic
structure ofX on Xtop; denote the resultingAut-holomorphic space byU.
Thus, we obtain anatural injection
π1(Xtop)=A u t (Utop/Xtop) ↪→Aut0(U)⊆Aut(U)
— where we recall [cf. Proposition 2.2, (ii); Corollary 2.3, (i)] that
Aut(U), equipped with the compact-open topology, is isomorphic, as a
topological group,t o GL2(R)/R×; we write Aut0(U) ⊆Aut(U) for
the connected component of the identity ofAut(U).
(c) In the notation of (b), X is not arithmetic if and only if the image
of π1(Xtop) in Aut0(U) is of ﬁnite index in its commensurator Π⊆

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 55
Aut0(U) in Aut0(U) [cf. [Mzk3],§2, §3]. If X is not arithmetic, then the
Aut-holomorphic orbispace
X→H
associated to thehyperbolic core H of X may be constructed by form-
ing the “orbispace quotient” ofUtop by Πand equipping this quotient with
the pre-Aut-holomorphic structure — which [cf. Corollary 2.3, (ii)] deter-
mines a uniqueAut-holomorphic structure — determined by restrict-
ing theAut-holomorphic structure ofU to some suitable local structure as
in (b).
Finally, the asserted “functoriality” is with respect toﬁnite ´etale morphismsof
Aut-holomorphic spaces arising from hyperbolic curves overC.
Proof. The validity of the algorithm asserted in Corollary 2.4 is immediate from
the constructions that appear in the statement of this algorithm [together with the
references quoted in these constructions].⃝
Remark 2.4.1. One veriﬁes immediately that Corollary 2.4 admits a natural
extension to the case whereX arises from ahyperbolic orbicurveoverC [cf. Remark
2.1.1].
Remark 2.4.2. Relative to the analogy with the theory of§1 [cf. Remark 2.7.3
below], Corollary 2.4 may be regarded as a sort ofholomorphic analogueof results
such as [Mzk10], Theorem 2.4, concerningcategories of ﬁnite ´etale localizationsof
hyperbolic orbicurves.
Next, we turn our attention to re-examining, from analgorithm-based point
of view, the theory ofaﬃne linear structures on Riemann surfacesin the style of
[Mzk14], §2; [Mzk14], Appendix. Following the terminology of [Mzk14], Deﬁnition
A.3, (i), (ii), we shall refer to as“parallelograms”, “rectangles”,o r “squares”the
distinguished open subsetsof C = R+iR which are of the form suggested by these
respective terms.
Proposition 2.5. (Linear Structures via Parallelograms, Rectangles, or
Squares) Let
U ⊆C = R+iR
be aconnected open subset. Write
S(U)⊆R(U)⊆P(U)
for the sets of pre-compactsquares, rectangles,a n dparallelograms in U;l e t
Q∈{ S,R,P}. Then there exists a functorial algorithm for constructing the
parallel line segments, parallelograms, orientations,a n d“local additive
structures”[in the sense described below] ofU that involves only the input data
(U,Q(U)) — i.e., consisting of theabstract set U, equipped with the datum of a

56 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
collection ofdistinguished open subsetsQ(U) [which clearly forms a basis for,
hence determines, the topology ofU] — as follows:
(a) Deﬁne a strict line segmentL of U to be an intersection of the form
L
def
= Q1
⋂
Q2
—w h e r eQ1, Q2 are the respective closures ofQ1,Q2 ∈Q(U); Q1
⋂Q2 =
∅; L is of inﬁnite cardinality. Deﬁne two strict line segments to be
strictly collinear if their intersection is of inﬁnite cardinality. Deﬁne
a strict chain of U to be a ﬁnite ordered set of strict line segments
L1,...,L n [where n ≥2 is an integer] such that Li, Li+1 are strictly
collinear fori =1 ,...,n −1. Then one constructs the [closed, bounded]
line segments of U by observing that a line segment may be character-
ized as the union of strict line segments contained a strict chain ofU;a n
endpoint of a line segmentL is a point of the boundary∂Lof L [i.e., a
point whose complement inL is connected].
(b) Deﬁne a ∂Q-parallelogram of U to be a closed subset ofU of the form
∂Q
def
= Q\Q —w h e r eQ ∈Q(U); Q denotes the closure ofQ. Deﬁne a
side of a parallelogramQ∈Q(U) to be a maximal line segment contained
in the ∂Q-parallelogram ∂Q. Deﬁne two line segments L, L′ of U to be
strictly parallel if there exist non-intersecting sidesS, S′ of a parallel-
ogram∈Q(U) such that S ⊆L, S′ ⊆L′. Then one constructs the pairs
(L,L′) of parallel line segmentsby observing thatL, L′ are parallel if
and only ifL is equivalent toL′ relative to the equivalence relation on line
segments generated by the relation of inclusion and the relation of being
strictly parallel.
(c) Deﬁne a pre-∂-parallelogram ∂Pof U to be a union of the mem-
bers of a family of four line segments{Li}i∈Z/4Z of U such that for any
two distinct points p1,p2 ∈∂P, there exists a line segmentL such that
∂L={p1,p2}, and, moreover, for eachi∈Z/4Z, Li and Li+2 are paral-
lel and non-intersecting, and we have an equality of setsLi
⋂Li+1 =
(∂Li) ⋂(∂Li+1) of cardinality one.I f ∂Pis a pre-∂-parallelogram ofU,
then deﬁne the associatedpre-parallelogram of U to be the union of line
segmentsL of U such ∂L⊆∂P. Then one constructs theparallelograms
∈P(U) of U as the interiors of the pre-parallelograms ofU.
(d) Let p∈U. Deﬁne aframe F =( S1,S2) of U at p to be an ordered pair
of distinct intersecting sidesS1, S2 of a parallelogramP ∈P(U) such that
S1
⋂S2 = {p}; in this situation, we shall refer to any line segment ofU
that has inﬁnite intersection withP as being framed by F. Deﬁne two
frames F =( S1,S2), F′ =( S′
1,S′
2) of U at p to bestrictly co-oriented
if S′
1 is framed byF,a n dS2 is framed byF′. Then one constructs the
orientations of U at p [of which there are precisely2] by observing that
an orientation ofU at p may be characterized as anequivalence class
of frames of U at p, relative to the equivalence relation on frames ofU
at p generated by the relation of being strictly co-oriented.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 57
(e) Let p ∈U. Then given a,b ∈U,t h esum a +p b ∈U, relative to the
origin p — i.e., the “local additive structure”of U at p —m a yb e
constructed, whenever it isdeﬁned, in the following fashion: If a = p,
then a +p b = b;i f b = p,t h e na +p b = a.I f a,b ̸= p, then for P ∈
P(U) such that P contains [distinct] intersecting sidesSa, Sb for which
Sa
⋂Sb ={p}, ∂Sa ={p,a}, ∂Sb ={p,b},w et a k ea+p b to be the unique
endpoint of a side ofP that ̸∈{a,b,p }.[ T h u s ,“a+p b” is deﬁned fora,b
in some neighborhood ofp in U.]
Finally, the asserted “functoriality” is with respect toopen immersions [of ab-
stract topological spaces]ι: U1 ↪→U2 [whereU1,U2 ⊆C are connected open subsets]
such thatιmaps Q(U1) into Q(U2).
Proof. The validity of the algorithm asserted in Proposition 2.5 is immediate from
the elementary content of the characterizations contained in the statement of this
algorithm. ⃝
Remark 2.5.1. We shall refer to aframe of U at p∈U as orthogonal if it arises
from an ordered pair of distinct intersecting sides of arectangle∈R(U)⊆P(U).
Proposition 2.6. (Local Linear Holomorphic Structures via Rectangles
or Squares) Let U, S, R, P, Q be as in Proposition 2.5; suppose further that
Q ̸= P. Then there exists a functorial algorithm for constructing the “local
linear holomorphic structure”[in the sense described below] ofU that involves
only the input data(U,Q(U)) — i.e., consisting of theabstract topological space
U, equipped with the datum of a collection ofdistinguished open subsetsQ(U)
—a sf o l l o w s :
(a) For p∈U, write
Ap
for the group ofautomorphisms of the projective system of connected
open neighborhoods ofp in U that arecompatible with the“local addi-
tive structures”of Proposition 2.5, (e), and preserve theorthogonal
frames and orientations [at p] of Proposition 2.5, (d); Remark 2.5.1.
Also, we equipAp with thetopology induced by the topologies of the open
neighborhoods of p that Ap acts on; note that the “local additive struc-
tures” of Proposition 2.5, (e), determine an additive structure, hence also
a topological ﬁeld structure on Ap
⋃{0}. Then we have a natural
isomorphism of topological groups
C× ∼
→Ap
[induced by the tautological action ofC× on C⊇U] that iscompatible
with the topological ﬁeld structures on the union of either side with
“{0}”. In particular, one may construct “C× at p” — i.e., the“local
linear holomorphic structure”of U at p — by thinking of this “lo-
cal linear holomorphic structure” as being constituted by thetopological

58 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
ﬁeld Ap
⋃{0}, equipped with its tautological action on the projective
system of open neighborhoods ofp.
(b) For p,p′ ∈U, one constructs anatural isomorphism of topological
groups
Ap
∼
→Ap′
that is compatible with thetopological ﬁeld structures on either side
as follows: Ifp′ is suﬃciently close top, then the“local additive struc-
tures”of Proposition 2.5, (e), determine homeomorphisms [by “trans-
lation”, i.e., “addition”] from suﬃciently small neighborhoods ofp onto
suﬃciently small neighborhoods ofp′; these homeomorphisms thus induce
the desired isomorphismAp
∼
→Ap′. Now, by joining an arbitraryp′ to p
via a chain of “suﬃciently small open neighborhoods” and composing the
resulting isomorphisms of “local linear holomorphic structures”, one ob-
tains the desired isomorphismAp
∼
→Ap′ for arbitraryp,p′ ∈U. Finally,
this isomorphism isindependent of the choice of a chain of “suﬃciently
small open neighborhoods” used in its construction.
Finally, the asserted “functoriality” is to be understood in the same sense as in
Proposition 2.5.
Proof. The validity of the algorithm asserted in Proposition 2.6 is immediate from
the elementary content of the characterizations contained in the statement of this
algorithm. ⃝
Remark 2.6.1. Thus, the algorithms of Propositions 2.5, 2.6 may be regarded
as superseding the techniques applied in the proof of [Mzk14], Proposition A.4.
Moreover, just as the theory of [Mzk14], Appendix, was applied in [Mzk14],§2,
one may apply the algorithms of Propositions 2.5, 2.6 to give algorithms forrecon-
structing the local linear and orthogonal structureson a Riemann surface equipped
with a nonzero square diﬀerential from the variouscategories which are the topic
of [Mzk14], Theorem 2.3. We leave the routine details to the interested reader.
Corollary 2.7. (Local Linear Holomorphic Structures via Holomorphic
Elliptic Cuspidalization)LetX be anelliptically admissibleAut-holomorphic
orbispace [cf. Remark 2.1.1] associated to a Riemann orbisurface X.T h e n
there exists a functorial algorithm for constructing the “local linear holo-
morphic structure”[cf. Proposition 2.6] onXtop that involves only the Aut-
holomorphic spaceX as input data, as follows:
(a) By the deﬁnition of “elliptically admissible”, we may apply Corollary
2.4, (c), to construct the [Aut-holomorphic orbispace associated to the]
semi-elliptic hyperbolic core X →H of X [i.e., X], together with the
unique [cf. [Mzk21], Remark 3.1.1] double coveringE →H by an Aut-
holomorphic space [i.e., the covering determined by the uniquetorsion-
free subgroup of index two of the groupΠof Corollary 2.4, (c)]. [Thus,

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 59
E is theAut-holomorphic space associated to aonce-punctured elliptic
curve.]
(b) By considering “elliptic cuspidalization diagrams”as in [Mzk21],
Example 3.2 [cf. also the equivalence of Corollary 2.3, (i)]
E←↩ U→E
—w h e r eU →E is an abelian ﬁnite ´etale covering [which necessarily
extends to a covering of the one-point compactiﬁcation ofEtop]; Etop ←↩
Utop is an open immersion whose image is the complement of a ﬁnite
subset ofEtop; E←↩ U, U→E areco-holomorphic — one may construct
the torsion pointsof [the elliptic curve determined by]E as the points in
the complement of the image of such morphismsU ↪→E, together with the
group structure on these torsion points [which is induced by the group
structure of the Galois groupGal(U/E)].
(c) Since the torsion points of (b) are dense in Etop, one may construct
the group structure on [the one-point compactiﬁcation of] Etop [that
arises from the elliptic curve determined byE]a st h eunique topolog-
ical group structure that extends the group structure on the torsion
points of (b). This group structure determines“local additive struc-
tures”[cf. Proposition 2.5, (e)] at the various points ofEtop. Moreover,
by considering one-parameter subgroups of these local additive group struc-
tures, one constructs theline segments[cf. Proposition 2.5, (a)] ofEtop;
by considering translations of line segments, relative to these local additive
group structures, one constructs the pairs ofparallel line segments[cf.
Proposition 2.5, (b)] of Etop, hence also the parallelograms, frames,
and orientations [cf. Proposition 2.5, (c), (d)] ofEtop.
(d) LetV be theAut-holomorphic space determined by a parallelogramVtop ⊆
Etop [cf. (c)]. Then the one-parameter subgroups of the [topological] group
AV(Vtop) [∼= SL2(R)/{±1} — cf. Proposition 2.2, (ii); Corollary 2.3,
(i); the Riemann mapping theorem of elementary complex analysis] are
precisely the closed connected subgroups for which the complement of some
connected open neighborhood of the identity element fails to be connected.
If S is a one-parameter subgroup ofAV(Vtop), p ∈Vtop,a n dL is a line
segment one of whose endpoints is equal top,t h e nL is tangent to S·p
at p if and only if any pairs of sequences of points ofL\{p}, (S·p)\{p},
converge to the same element of the quotient space
Vtop\{p} ↠ P(V,p)
determined by identifying positive real multiples of elements ofVtop\{p},
relative to the local additive structure atp. In particular, one may con-
struct theorthogonal framesof Etop as the frames consisting of pairs of
line segments L1, L2 emanating from a point p ∈Etop that are tan-
gent, respectively, to orbits S1 · p, S2 · p of one-parameter subgroups
S1,S2 ⊆AV(Vtop) such that S2 is obtained from S1 by conjugating S1
by anelement of order four[i.e., “±i”] of acompact one-parameter
subgroup [i.e., a “one-dimensional torus”] ofAV(Vtop) that ﬁxes p.

60 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(e) For p∈Etop, write
Ap
for the group ofautomorphisms of the projective system of connected
open neighborhoods ofp in Etop that arecompatible with the“local ad-
ditive structures”of (c) and preserve the orthogonal frames and
orientations [at p] of (c), (d) [cf. Proposition 2.6, (a)]. Then just
as in Proposition 2.6, (a), we obtaintopological ﬁeld structures on
Ap
⋃{0}, together with compatibleisomorphisms Ap
∼
→Ap′,f o rp′ ∈
Etop.T h i s s y s t e m o f “Ap’s” may be thought of as a system of“local
linear holomorphic structures”on Etop or Xtop.
Finally, the asserted “functoriality” is with respect toﬁnite ´etale morphismsof
Aut-holomorphic orbispaces arising from hyperbolic orbicurves overC.
Proof. The validity of the algorithm asserted in Corollary 2.7 is immediate from
the constructions that appear in the statement of this algorithm [together with the
references quoted in these constructions].⃝
Remark 2.7.1. It is by no means the intention of the author to assert that the
technique applied in Corollary 2.7, (b), (c), to recover the “local additive structure”
via elliptic cuspidalization is theunique way to construct thislocal additive struc-
ture. Indeed, perhaps the mostdirect approachto the problem of constructing the
local additive structure is tocompactifythe given once-punctured elliptic curve and
then to consider the group structure of the [connected component of the identity
of the] holomorphic automorphism groupof the resulting elliptic curve. By com-
parison to this direct approach, however, the technique of elliptic cuspidalization
has the virtue of beingcompatiblewith the“hyperbolic structure”of the hyperbolic
orbicurves involved. In particular, it is compatible with the various“hyperbolic fun-
damental groups”of these orbicurves. This sort of compatibility with fundamental
groups plays an essential role in thenonarchimedean theory[cf., e.g., the theory
of [Mzk18],§1, §2]. On the other hand, the “direct approach” described above is
not entirely unrelated to the approach via elliptic cuspidalization in the sense that,
if one thinks of thetorsion points in the latter approach as playing ananalogous
role to the role played by the “entire compactiﬁed elliptic curve” in the former
approach, then the latter approach may be thought of as a sort ofdiscretization
via torsion points— cf. the point of view ofHodge-Arakelov theory, as discussed in
[Mzk6], [Mzk7] — of the former approach. Here, we note that thedensity of torsion
pointsin the archimedean theory of theelliptic cuspidalizationis reminiscent of the
density of NF-pointsin the nonarchimedean theory of theBelyi cuspidalization[cf.
§1].
Remark 2.7.2. In light of the role played by the technique ofelliptic cuspidal-
ization both in Corollary 2.7 and in the theory of [Mzk18],§1, §2, it is of interest
to compare these two theories. From an archimedean point of view, the theory of
[Mzk18]mayberoughlysummarizedasfollows: Onebeginswiththe uniformization
G ↠ G/qZ ∼
→E

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 61
of an elliptic curve E over C by a copyG of C×. Here, the “q-parameter” ofE
may be thought of as being an element
q∈H
def
= G⊗Gal(G/E)
[where we recall that Gal(G/E) ∼= Z]. Then one thinks of the theta function
associated toE as afunction Θ: G→H [i.e., a function deﬁned onG with values
in H]. From this point of view, the various types ofrigidity considered in the theory
of [Mzk18] may be understood in the following fashion:
(a) Cyclotomic rigidity corresponds to the portion of thetautological iso-
morphism H
∼
→G⊗Gal(G/E) involving themaximal compact subgroups,
i.e., the copies ofS1 def
= {z∈C× || z| =1}⊆C×.
(b) Discrete rigiditycorresponds to the portion of thetautological isomor-
phism H
∼
→G⊗Gal(G/E) involving thequotients by the maximal compact
subgroups, i.e., the copies ofR>0
def
= {z∈R| z> 0}∼= C×/S1.
(c) Constant rigiditycorresponds to considering the normalization of Θ given
by taking the values of Θ at the points ofG corresponding to±√−1t o
be ±1.
In particular, the“canonical copy ofC×”that arises from (a), (b) — i.e.,H —i s
related to the “copies ofC×” that occur as the “Ap” of Corollary 2.7, (e), in the
following way:Ap is given by the linear holomorphic automorphisms of thetangent
space to a point ofH. That is to say, roughly speaking,Ap (∼= C×) is related to
H (∼= C×) by the operation of“taking the logarithm”, followed by the operation of
“taking Aut(−)”[of the resulting linearization].
Remark 2.7.3. It is interesting to note that just as the absolute Galois group
Gk of an MLFk m a yb er e g a r d e da satwo-dimensional object with one rigidand
one non-rigid dimension [cf. Remark 1.9.4], the topological group C× is also a
two-dimensional object withone rigiddimension — i.e.,
S1 def
= {z∈C× || z| =1}⊆C×
[a topological group whose automorphism group is of order 2] — andone non-rigid
dimension — i.e.,
R>0
def
= {z∈R | z> 0}⊆C×
[a topological group that is isomorphic toR, hence has automorphism group given
by R× — i.e., a“continuous family of dilations”]. Moreover, just as, in the context
of Theorem 1.9, Corollary 1.10, considering Gk equipped with its outer action
on ΔX has the eﬀect of renderingboth dimensionsof Gk rigid [cf. Remark 1.9.4],
considering “C×” as arising, in the fashion discussed in Corollary 2.7, from a certain
Aut-holomorphic orbispacehas the eﬀect ofrigidifying both dimensionsof C×.W e
refer to Remark 2.7.4 below for more on thisanalogy between the
(i) outer action ofGk on ΔX

62 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
and the notion of an
(ii) Aut-holomorphic orbispace
associated to a hyperbolic orbicurve. Finally, we observe that from the point of
view of theproblem of
ﬁnding an algorithm to construct thebase ﬁeld of a hyperbolic orbicurve
from (i), (ii),
one may think of Theorem 1.9 and Corollaries 1.10, 2.7 as furnishingsolutions to
various versions of this problem.
Remark 2.7.4. The usual deﬁnition of a“holomorphic structure”on a Riemann
s u r f a c ei sv i alocal comparisonto some ﬁxedmodel of the topological ﬁeldC.T h e
local homeomorphisms that enable this comparison are related to one another by
homeomorphisms of open neighborhoods ofC that are holomorphic. On the other
hand, this deﬁnition does not yield anyabsolute description — i.e., a description
that depends onmathematical structuresthat do not involveexplicit use of models
— of what precisely is meant by the notion of a “holomorphic structure”. Instead,
it relies on relating/comparing the given manifold to the ﬁxed model ofC —a n
approach that is“model-explicit”. By contrast, the notion of atopological space
[i.e., consisting of the datum of a collection of subsets that are to be regarded as
“open”]is absolute, or“model-implicit”. In a similar vein, the approach toquasi-
conformal or conformal structures via the datum of a collection ofparallelograms,
rectangles,o rsquares[cf. Propositions2.5, 2.6; Remark2.6.1; thetheoryof[Mzk14]]
is “model-implicit”. The approach to “holomorphic structures” on a Riemann sur-
face via the classical notion of a“conformal structure”[i.e., the datum of various
orthogonal pairs of tangent vectors] is, so to speak,“relatively model-implicit”, i.e.,
“model-implicit” modulo the fact that it depends on the“model-explicit”deﬁnition
of the notion of adiﬀerential manifold— which may be thought of as a sort of “lo-
cal linear structure” that is given bylocal comparisonto the local linear structure
of Euclidean space. From this point of view:
The notions of an“outer action ofGk on ΔX”and an“Aut-holomorphic
orbispace”[cf. Remark 2.7.3, (i), (ii)] have the virtue of being“model-
implicit”— i.e., they do not depend on any sort of [local] comparison to
some ﬁxed reference model.
In this context, it is interesting to note that all of the examples given so far of
“model-implicit” deﬁnitions depend on data consisting either ofsubsets [e.g., open
subsets of a topological space; parallelograms, rectangles, or squares on a Riemann
surface] orendomorphisms [e.g., the automorphisms that appear in a Galois cat-
egory; the automorphisms that appear in an Aut-holomorphic structure]. [Here, in
passing, we note that the appearance of “endomorphisms” in the present discussion
is reminiscent of the discussion of“hidden endomorphisms”in the Introduction to
[Mzk21].] Also, we observe that this dichotomy between model-explicit and model-
implicit deﬁnitions isstrongly reminiscentof the distinction betweenbi-anabelian
and mono-anabelian geometry discussed in Remark 1.9.8.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 63
Finally, we relate the archimedean theory of the present §2t ot h eGalois-
theoretictheoryof §1, inthecaseof number ﬁelds,viaasortof archimedean analogue
of Corollary 1.10.
Corollary 2.8. (Galois-theoretic Reconstruction of Aut-holomorphic
Spaces) Let X, k ⊆k ⊇kNF,a n d1 →ΔX →ΠX →Gk →1 be as in Theorem
1.9; suppose further that k is a number ﬁeld [so kNF = k], and [for simplic-
ity — cf. Remark 2.8.2 below] thatX is a curve. Then one may think of each
archimedean prime of the ﬁeldk
×
NF
⋃{0} (∼= kNF) constructed in Theorem 1.9,
(e), as atopology on k
×
NF
⋃{0} satisfying certain properties. Moreover, for each
such archimedean prime v, there exists afunctorial “group-theoretic” al-
gorithm for reconstructing theAut-holomorphic spaceXv associated to
Xv
def
= X×k kv
[where we writekv for the completion of k
×
NF
⋃{0} at v]f r o mt h etopological
group ΠX; this algorithm consists of the following steps:
(a) Deﬁne a Cauchy sequence{xj}j∈N of NF-points [ofXv]t ob eas e -
quence of NF-pointsxj [i.e., conjugacy classes of decomposition groups of
NF-points inΠX — cf. Theorem 1.9, (a)] such that there exists a ﬁnite
set of NF-points S — which we shall refer to as a conductor for the
Cauchy sequence — satisfying the following two conditions: (i)xj ̸∈S for
all but ﬁnitely manyj ∈N; (ii) for everyNF-rational functionf on Xk
as in Theorem 1.9, (d), whose divisor of polesavoids S, the sequence of
[non-inﬁnite, for all but ﬁnitely manyj — cf. (i)] values{f(xj)∈kv}j∈N
forms a Cauchy sequence [in the usual sense] ofkv.T w oC a u c h ys e -
quences{xj}j∈N, {yj}j∈N of NF-points which admit a common conductor
S will be calledequivalent if for everyNF-rational functionf on Xk
as in Theorem 1.9, (d), whose divisor of polesavoids S, the sequences
of [non-inﬁnite, for all but ﬁnitely manyj]v a l u e s{f(xj)}j∈N,{f(yj)}j∈N
form Cauchy sequences inkv that converge to thesame element of kv.
For U ⊆kv an open subset andf an NF-rational function onXk as in
Theorem 1.9, (d), we obtain a setN(U,f ) of Cauchy sequences of NF-
points by considering the Cauchy sequences of NF-points{xj}j∈N such
that f(xj) [is ﬁnite and] ∈U, for all j ∈N. Then one constructs the
topological space
Xtop = Xv(kv)
as the set ofequivalence classes of Cauchy sequences of NF-points,
equipped with thetopology deﬁned by the sets “N(U,f )”.
(b) Let UX ⊆Xtop, Uv ⊆kv be connected open subsets and f a NF-
rational function on Xk as in Theorem 1.9, (d), such that the func-
tion deﬁned by f on UX [i.e., by taking limits of Cauchy sequences of
values in kv — cf. (a)] determines ahomeomorphism fU : UX
∼
→Uv.
Write Authol(Uv) for the group of self-homeomorphismsUv
∼
→Uv (⊆kv),
which, relative to the topological ﬁeld structure of kv, can locally [on

64 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Uv] be expressed as aconvergent power serieswith coeﬃcients inkv;
AX(UX)
def
= f−1
U ◦Authol(Uv)◦fU ⊆Aut(UX). Then one constructs the
Aut-holomorphic structureAX on Xtop as the unique [cf. Corollary
2.3, (ii)]Aut-holomorphic structure that extends the pre-Aut-holomorphic
structure determined by the groups “AX(UX)”; we takeXv to be theAut-
holomorphic spacedetermined by the objects(Xtop,AX).
Finally, the asserted “functoriality” is with respect toarbitrary open injective
homomorphisms of proﬁnite groups [i.e., of “ΠX”] that arecompatible with the
respective choices ofarchimedean valuations[i.e., “v”].
Proof. The validity of the algorithm asserted in Corollary 2.8 is immediate from
the constructions that appear in the statement of this algorithm [together with the
references quoted in these constructions].⃝
Remark 2.8.1. One veriﬁes immediately that the isomorphism class of thepair
(1→ΔX →ΠX →Gk →1,v) depends only on therestriction of v to the subﬁeld
k× ⋃{0}⊆k
×
NF
⋃{0}.
Remark 2.8.2. One veriﬁes immediately that Corollary 2.8 [as well as Corollary
2.9 below] may be extended to the case whereX is a hyperbolic orbicurvethat is
not necessarily a curve [soXv will be an Aut-holomorphic orbispace].
Remark 2.8.3. One veriﬁes immediately that anyelliptically admissible hyper-
bolic orbicurvedeﬁned over a number ﬁeldis of strictly Belyi type. In particular, if
o n ei sg i v e na nelliptically admissible hyperbolic orbicurveX that isdeﬁned over a
number ﬁeldk, then it makes sense to apply Corollary 2.7 to the Aut-holomorphic
[orbi]spacesconstructedinCorollary2.8. This compatibilitybetweenCorollaries2.7,
2.8 [cf. also Corollary 2.9 below] is one reason why it is of interest to construct the
local additive structuresas in Corollary 2.7, (c), directly from the Aut-holomorphic
structure as opposed to via the“parallelogram-theoretic”approach of Proposition
2.5, 2.6 [cf. also Remark 2.6.1], which is more suited to “strictly archimedean
situations”— i.e., situations in which one is not concerned with regarding Aut-
holomorphic orbispaces as arising from hyperbolic orbicurves over number ﬁelds.
Corollary 2.9. (Global-Archimedean Elliptically Admissible Compat-
ibility) In the notation of Corollary 2.8, suppose further thatX is elliptically
admissible; take the Aut-holomorphic space X of Corollary 2.7 to be the Aut-
holomorphic space determined by the objects(Xtop,AX) constructed in Corollary
2.8. Then one may construct, in a functorially algorithmic fashion, an iso-
morphism between the topological ﬁeld kv of Corollary 2.8 and the topological
ﬁelds “Ap
⋃{0}” of Corollary 2.7, (e), in the following way:
(a) Let x∈Xv(kv) be an NF-point. The local additive structures onEtop [cf.
Corollary 2.7, (c)] determinelocal additive structures on Xtop;l e t⃗v
be an element of a suﬃciently small neighborhoodUX ⊆Xtop of x in Xtop

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 65
that admits such a local additive structure. Then for each NF-rational
function f that vanishes atx, the assignment
(⃗v,f )↦→ lim
n→∞
n·f(1
n ·x ⃗v) ∈kv
[where “·x” is the operation arising from the local additive structure atx]
depends only on the imagedf|x ∈ωx of f in the Zariski cotangent space
ωx to Xv at x and, moreover, determines atopological embedding
ιUX,x : UX ↪→Homkv(ωx,kv)
that is compatible with the“local additive structures”of the domain
and codomain.
(b) By letting the neighborhoodsUX of a ﬁxed NF-pointx vary,t h er e s u l t i n g
ιUX,x determine anisomorphism of topological ﬁelds
Ax
⋃
{0}
∼
→kv
via the condition ofcompatibility [with respect to theιUX,x] with the nat-
ural actions ofAx, kv, respectively, on the domain and codomain ofιUX,x.
Moreover, as x varies, these isomorphisms are compatible with the iso-
morphisms Ax1
⋃{0}
∼
→Ax2
⋃{0} [where x1,x2 ∈X(kv) are NF-points]
of Corollary 2.7, (e).
Finally, the asserted “functoriality” is to be understood in the sense described in
Corollary 2.8.
Proof. The validity of the algorithm asserted in Corollary 2.9 is immediate from
the constructions that appear in the statement of this algorithm [together with the
references quoted in these constructions].⃝

66 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Section 3: Nonarchimedean Log-Frobenius Compatibility
In the present§3, we give an interpretation of thenonarchimedean local portion
of the theory of§1 in terms of a certaincompatibilitywith the“log-Frobenius func-
tor”[in essence, a version of the usual “logarithm” at the various nonarchimedean
primes of a number ﬁeld]. In order to express this compatibility, certain abstract
category-theoreticideas—whichcenteraroundthenotionsof observables, telecores,
and cores— are introduced [cf. Deﬁnition 3.5]. These notions allow one to express
the log-Frobenius compatibilityof themono-anabelianconstruction algorithms of§1
[cf. Corollary 3.6], as well as thefailure of log-Frobenius compatibilitythat occurs if
one attempts to take a“bi-anabelian”approach to the situation [cf. Corollary 3.7].
Deﬁnition 3.1.
(i) Letk bean MLF,k analgebraic closureofk, Gk
def
= Gal(k/k). WriteOk ⊆k
for thering of integersof k, O×
k ⊆Ok for thegroup of unitsof Ok,a n dO⊿
k ⊆Ok
for the multiplicative monoid of nonzero elements[cf. [Mzk17], Example 1.1, (i)];
we shall use similar notation for other subﬁelds ofk.L e tΠk be atopological group,
equipped with acontinuous surjectionϵk :Πk ↠ Gk. Note that the [p-adic, ifk is
of residue characteristicp] logarithm determines a Πk-equivariant isomorphism
logk : k∼ def
=( O×
k )pf ∼
→k
[where “pf” denotes theperfection [cf., e.g., [Mzk16], §0]; the Πk-action is the
action obtained by composing withϵk]o ft h et o po l o g i c a lg r o u pk∼ onto the additive
topological groupk. Next, let us refer to an abelian monoid [e.g., an abelian group]
whose subgroup of torsion elements is [abstractly] isomorphic toQ/Z as torsion-
cyclotomic;l e tT be one of the following categories [cf.§0 for more on the preﬁx
“ind-”]:
· TF: ind-topological ﬁeldsand homomorphisms of ind-topological ﬁelds;
· TCG: torsion-cyclotomic ind-compact abelian topological groupsand ho-
momorphisms of ind-topological groups;
· TLG: torsion-cyclotomic ind-locally compact abelian topological groups
and homomorphisms of ind-topological groups;
· TM: torsion-cyclotomic ind-topological abelian monoidsand homomor-
phisms of ind-topological monoids;
·TS: ind-locally compact topological spacesandmorphismsofind-topological
spaces;
· TS⊞: ind-locally compact abelian topological groupsand homomorphisms
of ind-topological groups [so we have a natural full embeddingTLG ↪→
TS⊞].
If T is equal to TF (respectively, TCG; TLG; TM; TS; TS⊞), then let Mk ∈
Ob(T) be the object determined byk (respectively, the object determined byO×
k ;

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 67
the object determined by k
×
; the object determined by O⊿
k ; any object of TS
equipped with afaithful continuous Gk-action; any object ofTS⊞ equipped with
a faithful continuous Gk-action). We shall refer to as amodel MLF-GaloisT-pair
any collection of data (a), (b), (c) of the following form:
(a) the topological groupΠk,
(b) the object Mk ∈Ob(T),
(c) the action of Πk on Mk
[so the quotient Πk ↠ Gk may be recovered as the image of the homomorphism
Πk →Aut(Mk) arising from the action of (c)]; we shall often use the abbreviated
notation (Πk ↷ Mk) for this collection of data (a), (b), (c).
(ii) We shall refer to any collection of data (Π↷ M) consisting of a topological
group Π, an objectM ∈Ob(T), and a continuous action of Π onM as anMLF-
Galois T-pairif, for some model MLF-GaloisT-pair (Πk ↷ Mk) [where the notation
is as in (i)], there exist an isomorphism of topological groups Πk
∼
→Πa n da n
isomorphism of objects Mk
∼
→M of T that are compatible with the respective
actions of Πk,Πo nMk, M; in this situation, we shall refer to Π as theGalois group,
to the surjection Π↠ G determined by the action of Π onM [cf. (i)] as theGalois
augmentation,t o G as the arithmetic Galois group,a n dt oM as the arithmetic
data of the MLF-GaloisT-pair (Π↷ M); if, in this situation, the surjection Πk ↠
Gk arises from the ´etale fundamental group of an arbitrary hyperbolic orbicurve
(respectively, a hyperbolic orbicurve of strictly Belyi type) overk, then we shall
refer to the MLF-Galois T-pair (Π↷ M)a sb e i n gof hyperbolic orbicurve type
(respectively, of strictly Belyi type); if, in this situation, the surjection Πk ↠ Gk is
an isomorphism, then we shall refer to the MLF-GaloisT-pair (Π↷ M)a sb e i n g
of mono-analytic type[cf. Remark 5.6.1 below for more on this terminology]. A
morphism of MLF-GaloisT-pairs
φ:( Π1 ↷ M1)→(Π2 ↷ M2)
consists of amorphism of objectsφM : M1 →M2 of T, together with acompatible
[relative to the respective actions of Π1,Π2 on M1, M2] continuous homomorphism
of topological groups φΠ :Π 1 →Π2 that induces an open injective homomor-
phism between the respectivearithmetic Galois groups; if, in this situation, φM
(respectively, φΠ) is an isomorphism, then we shall refer toφas aT-isomorphism
(respectively, Galois-isomorphism).
(iii) Write
CMLF
T
for the category whose objects are the MLF-Galois T-pairs and whose morphisms
are the morphisms of MLF-GaloisT-pairs. Also, we shall use the same notation,
except with “C”replacedby
C (respectively,C; C)
to denote the various subcategories determined by theT-isomorphisms (respec-
tively, Galois-isomorphisms; isomorphisms); we shall use the same notation, with
“MLF”replacedby
MLF-hyp (respectively, MLF-sB; MLF⊢)

68 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
to denote the various full subcategories determined by the objectsof hyperbolic
orbicurve type (respectively, of strictly Belyi type; of mono-analytic type). Since
[in the notation of (i)] the formation ofO⊿
k (respectively, k
×
; O×
k ; O×
k )f r o mk
(respectively,O⊿
k ;O⊿
k ; k
×
) is clearlyintrinsically deﬁned[i.e., depends only on the
“input data of an object ofT”], we thus obtainnatural functors
CMLF
TF →CMLF
TM ; CMLF
TM →CMLF
TLG ; CMLF
TM →CMLF
TCG ; CMLF
TLG →CMLF
TCG
— i.e., by taking the multiplicative group of nonzero integral elements [i.e., the
elements a ∈k× such that a−n fails to converge to 0, asN ∋ n →+∞]o ft h e
arithmetic data, the associatedgroupiﬁcation Mgp of the arithmetic dataM,t h e
subgroup of invertible elements M× of the arithmetic data M,o rt h emaximal
compact subgroupsof the subgroups of the arithmetic data obtained as subgroups
of invariants for various open subgroups of the Galois group. Finally, we shall write
TG
for thecategory of topological groupsand continuous homomorphisms and
TG⊇TGhyp ⊇TGsB
for the subcategories determined, respectively, by the ´etale fundamental groups of
arbitrary hyperbolic orbicurves over MLF’s and the´etale fundamental groups of hy-
perbolic orbicurves of strictly Belyi type over MLF’s, and the homomorphisms that
induce open injections on the quotients constituted by the absolute Galois groups
of the base ﬁeld MLF’s; also, we shall use the same notation, except with “TG”re-
placedby TG to denote the various subcategories determined by theisomorphisms.
Thus, for T ∈{TF,TCG,TLG,TM,TS,TS⊞}, the assignment (Π↷ M) ↦→Π
determines variouscompatible natural functors
CMLF
T →TG
[as well asdouble underlinedversions of these functors].
(iv) Observe that [in the notation of (i)] the ﬁeld structure ofk determines,
via the inverse morphism to logk, a structure oftopological ﬁeldon the topological
group k∼. Since the various operations applied here to construct this ﬁeld struc-
ture onk∼ [such as, for instance, thepower seriesused to deﬁne logk] are clearly
intrinsically deﬁned [cf. the natural functors deﬁned in (iii)], we thus obtain that
the construction that assigns
(the ind-topological ﬁeldk, with its natural Πk-action)
↦→(the ind-topological ﬁeldk∼, with its natural Πk-action)
determines anatural functor
logTF,TF :CMLF
TF →CMLF
TF
— which we shall refer to as thelog-Frobenius functor[cf. Remark 3.6.2 below].
Since logk determines afunctorial isomorphismbetween the ﬁeldsk, k∼, it follows

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 69
immediately that the functorlogTF,TF isisomorphic to the identity functor[hence, in
particular, is anequivalence of categories]. By composing logTF,TF with the various
natural functors deﬁned in (iii), we also obtain, forT∈{TLG,TCG,TM}, a functor
logTF,T :CMLF
TF →CMLF
T
— which [by abuse of terminology] we shall also refer to as “the log-Frobenius
functor”. In a similar vein, the assignments
(the ind-topological ﬁeldk, with its natural Πk-action)
↦→(the ind-topological spacek
×
, with its natural Πk-action)
(the ind-topological ﬁeldk, with its natural Πk-action)
↦→(the ind-topological space (k
×
)pf, with its natural Πk-action)
determine natural functors
λ× :CMLF
TF →CMLF
TS ; λ×pf :CMLF
TF →CMLF
TS
together withdiagrams of functors
CMLF
TF
logTF,TF
−→ C MLF
TF
⏐⏐
↓
λ×pf
ιlog
↶
⏐⏐
↓
λ×
CMLF
TS = CMLF
TS
CMLF
TF
⏐⏐
↓
λ×
ι×
↷
⏐⏐
↓
λ×pf
CMLF
TS
—w h e r ew ew r i t eιlog : λ×◦logTF,TF →λ×pf for the natural transformation induced
by the natural inclusion “(k∼)× ↪→k∼ =( O×
k )pf ↪→(k
×
)pf”a n dι× : λ× →λ×pf
for the natural transformation induced by the natural map “k
×
→(k
×
)pf”. Finally,
we note that the subﬁeld of Galois-invariants “(k∼)Πk” of the ﬁeld “k∼” obtained
by the above construction [i.e., the arithmetic data of an object in the image of
the log-Frobenius functorlogTF,TF] is equipped with anatural “compactum”— i.e.,
the compact submodule ofk∼ =(O×
k )pf determined by theimage of the subgroup
O×
k =( O×
k )Πk ⊆O×
k of Galois-invariants ofO×
k — which we shall refer to as the
pre-log-shell
λ(Π↷M) ⊆logarith
TF,TF((Π↷ M))
[where (Π↷ M) ∈Ob(CMLF
TF )] of the arithmetic datalogarith
TF,TF((Π↷ M)) of the
object determined by applying the log-Frobenius functor logTF,TF to the object
(Π
κ
↶ M).
(v) In the notation of (i), suppose further that T ∈{TLG,TCG,TM};l e t
(Π↷ M)b ea nMLF-Galois T-pair. Then we shall refer to the proﬁnite Π-module
μ ˆZ(M)
def
= Hom(Q/Z,M )
[which is isomorphic toˆZ]a st h ecyclotome associated to (Π↷ M). Also, we shall
write μQ/Z(M)
def
= μ ˆZ(M)⊗Q/Z.

70 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(vi) Recall the “image via the Kummer map of the multiplicative group of an
algebraic closure of the base ﬁeld”
k
×
↪→lim−→J
H1(J, μ ˆZ(Π))
[where “J” ranges over the open subgroups of Π] — which was constructed via a
purely “group-theoretic” algorithmin Corollary 1.10, (d), (h), for Π∈Ob(TGsB).
Write
Anab
for the category whoseobjects are pairs
(
Π,Π↷{k
×
↪→lim−→J
H1(J, μ ˆZ(Π))}
)
consisting of an object Π∈Ob(TGsB), together with the image of the Kummer map
reviewed above, equipped with its topological ﬁeld structure and natural action via
Π — all of which is to be understood as constructed via the“group-theoretic” algo-
rithms of Corollary 1.10, (d), (h) [cf. Remark 3.1.2 below] — and whosemorphisms
are the morphisms induced by isomorphisms ofTGsB. Thus, we obtain anatural
functor
TGsB κAn
−→Anab
which [as is easily veriﬁed] is anequivalence of categories, a quasi-inverse for which
is given by the natural projection functorAnab→TGsB.
Remark 3.1.1. Observe that [in the notation of Deﬁnition 3.1, (i)] thetopology
on the ﬁeldk, the groupsk× and O×
k , or the monoidO⊿
k is completely determined
by the ﬁeld, group, or monoid structures of these objects. Indeed, the topology
on O×
k is precisely the proﬁnite topology; the topologies on k, k×,a n dO⊿
k are
determined by the topology on the subsetO×
k ⊆O⊿
k ⊆k× ⊆k [cf. the various
natural functors of Deﬁnition 3.1, (iii); the fact thatO×
k ⊆k× may be characterized
as the subgroup of elements divisible by arbitrary powers of some prime number].
Suppose thatT̸= TS,TS⊞. Then note that one may apply this observation to the
various subﬁelds, subgroups, or submonoids obtained from the arithmetic data of an
MLF-Galois T-pair by taking the invariants with respect to some open subgroup of
the Galois group. Thus, we conclude that one obtains an entirely equivalent theory
if oneomits the speciﬁcation of the topology,a sw e l la so ft h e“ind-” structure[i.e.,
one works with the inductivelimit ﬁelds, groups, or monoids, as opposed to the
inductive systems of such objects] from the objects ofT considered in Deﬁnition
3.1, (i). In particular, the data that forms an object ofCMLF
TM is precisely the data
used to construct the“model p-adic Frobenioids”of [Mzk17], Example 1.1.
Remark 3.1.2. It is important to note that, by deﬁnition, thealgorithms of
Corollary 1.10 form anessential portion of each objectof the categoryAnab. Put
another way, the“software”constituted by these algorithms isnot just executed
once, leaving behind some “output data” that suﬃces for the remainder of the
development of the theory, but ratherexecuted over and over againwithin each
object of Anab.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 71
Remark 3.1.3. One natural variant of the notion of an “MLF-GaloisT-pair
of hyperbolic orbicurve type” is the notion of an“MLF-Galois T-pair of tempered
hyperbolic orbicurve type”, i.e., the case where [in the notation of Deﬁnition 3.1,
(ii)] Πk ↠ Gk arises from thetempered fundamental groupof a hyperbolic orbicurve
over k [cf. Remarks 1.9.1, 1.10.2]. We leave to the reader the routine details of
developing the resulting tempered version of the theory to follow.
Proposition 3.2. (Monoid Cyclotomes and Kummer Maps) Let T ∈
{TM,TF}; (Π↷ MT)∈Ob(CMLF
T ) an MLF-Galois T-pair, with arithmetic Ga-
lois group Π ↠ G. Write (Π↷ MTM) ∈Ob(CMLF
TM ) for the object obtained from
(Π↷ MT) by applying the identity functor ifT = TM or by applying the natural
functor of Deﬁnition 3.1, (iii), ifT = TF.T h e n :
(i) The arguments given in the proof of [Mzk9], Proposition 1.2.1, (vii), yield a
functorial [i.e., relative toCMLF
T , in the evident sense — cf. Remark 3.2.2 below]
algorithm for constructing thenatural isomorphism
H2(G, μ ˆZ(MTM))
∼
→ˆZ
— i.e., by composing the natural isomorphism [of “Brauer groups”]
H2(G, μQ/Z(MTM))
∼
→H2(G,M gp
TM)
[where “gp” denotes the groupiﬁcation of a monoid] with the inverse of the natural
isomorphism [of “Brauer groups”]
H2(Gunr,(Munr
TM )gp)
∼
→H2(G,M gp
TM)
[where Munr
TM ⊆MTM denotes the submonoid of elements ﬁxed by the kernel of
the quotient G ↠ Gunr of Corollary 1.10, (b)] followed by the natural composite
isomorphism
H2(Gunr,(Munr
TM )gp)
∼
→H2(Gunr,(Munr
TM )gp/(Munr
TM )×)
∼
→H2(ˆZ,Z)
∼
→Q/Z
[where “×” denotes the subgroup of invertible elements of a monoid; the isomor-
phism (Munr
TM )gp/(Munr
TM )× ∼
→Z is obtained by considering a generator of the
monoid Munr
TM /(Munr
TM )× ∼= N; we apply the isomorphism Gunr ∼
→ ˆZ of Corollary
1.10, (b)] and then applying the functorHom(Q/Z,−) to the resulting isomorphism
H2(G, μQ/Z(MTM))
∼
→Q/Z [cf. also Remark 3.2.1 below].
(ii) By considering the action of open subgroupsH ⊆Πon elements ofMTM
that are roots of elements ofMH
TM [i.e., the submonoid of MTM consisting of H-
invariant elements], we obtain afunctorial [i.e., relative toCMLF
T , in the evident
sense] algorithm for constructing theKummer maps
MH
TM →H1(H, μ ˆZ(MTM)); MTM →lim−→J
H1(J, μ ˆZ(MTM))
—w h e r e“J” ranges over the open subgroups ofΠ. In particular, the “μ ˆZ(MTM)”i n
the above display may be replaced by “μ ˆZ(G)” [cf. Remarks 3.2.1, 3.2.2 below]; if,

72 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
moreover, (Π↷ MT) is of hyperbolic orbicurve type, then the “μ ˆZ(MTM)”i n
the above display may be replaced by “μ ˆZ(Π)” [cf. Corollary 1.10, (c)] or “μκ
ˆZ
(Π)”
[cf. Remark 1.10.3, (ii)] — cf. Remark 3.2.2 below.
(iii) Suppose that(Π↷ MT) is of strictly Belyi type. Then the construction
of Corollary 1.10, (h), determines anadditive structure[hence, in particular, a
topological ﬁeld structure] on the union with “{0}” of the group generated by
the image of the Kummer map
MTM →lim−→J
H1(J, μ ˆZ(MTM))
of (ii). In particular, these constructions yield afunctorial [i.e., relative toCMLF
T ,
in the evident sense — cf. Remark 3.2.2 below]algorithm for constructing this
topological ﬁeld structure.
(iv) If (Π∗↷ M∗
T) ∈Ob(CMLF
T ), then the natural functor of Deﬁnition 3.1,
(iii), induces aninjection
IsomCMLF
T
((Π↷ MT),(Π∗↷ M∗
T)) ↪→IsomTG(Π,Π∗)
on sets of isomorphisms; this injection is abijection if T = TM,o ri f[T is either
TM or TF,a n d ](Π↷ MT), (Π∗↷ M∗
T) areof strictly Belyi type.I np a r t i c u l a r ,
if (Π↷ MT) is of hyperbolic orbicurve type, then the group
AutCMLF
T
((Π↷ MT))
— which is isomorphic to a subgroup ofAutTG(Π)that contains the subgroup of
AutTG(Π)determined by theinner automorphisms of Π—i s center-free;t h e
categoriesTGhyp, TGsB, TGhyp, TGsB, CMLF-hyp
T , CMLF-sB
T , CMLF-hyp
T , CMLF-sB
T are
id-rigid [cf. §0].
(v) The algorithm of (iii) yields a natural [1-]factorization
CMLF-sB
TF −→ CMLF-sB
T
logT,T′
−→ CMLF-sB
T′
—w h e r eT′ ∈{TF,TLG,TCG,TM}; the ﬁrst arrow is the natural functor of Def-
inition 3.1, (iii), if T = TM, or the identity functor ifT = TF —o ft h e[ “sB”
versions of the] log-Frobenius functors logTF,T′ : CMLF
TF →CMLF
T′ of Deﬁnition
3.1, (iv). Moreover, the functor logT,T is isomorphic to the identity functor
[hence, in particular, is anequivalence of categories].
Proof. Assertions (i), (ii), (iii), (v) are immediate from the constructions that
appear in the statement of these assertions [together with the references quoted
in these constructions]. The injectivity portion of assertion (iv) follows from the
functorial algorithms of assertions (i), (ii) [which imply that automorphisms of
(Π↷ MTM) that act trivially on Π necessarily act trivially onMTM]. In light of
this injectivity, the center-free-ness portionof assertion (iv) follows immediately
from the slimness of Π [cf., e.g., [Mzk20], Proposition 2.3, (ii)]. Thesurjectivity
portion of assertion (iv) follows from assertion (iii), when (Π↷ MT), (Π∗↷ M∗
T)

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 73
are of strictly Belyi type, and from considering the “copy ofMTM
∼
→O⊿
k embedded
in abelianizations of open subgroups ofG
∼
→Gk via local class ﬁeld theory”[ c f . ,
e.g., [Mzk9], Proposition 1.2.1, (iii), (iv)], together with assertions (i), (ii) [cf. also
the ﬁrst displayed isomorphism of Corollary 1.10, (b)], whenT = TM. ⃝
Remark 3.2.1. Note that the algorithm applied to construct the natural isomor-
phism of Corollary 1.10, (a), is essentially thesame as the algorithm of Proposition
3.2, (i). In particular, this algorithm doesnot require that (Π↷ MT)b e of hy-
perbolic orbicurve type. Thus, by imposing the condition of “compatibility with
the natural isomorphism of Corollary 1.10, (a)”, we thus obtain, in the context of
Proposition 3.2, (i), afunctorial algorithmfor constructing thenatural isomorphism
μ ˆZ(MTM)
∼
→μ ˆZ(G)
[cf. also Remark 1.10.3, (ii)].
Remark 3.2.2. Note that [cf. Remark 1.10.1, (iii)] thefunctoriality of Propo-
sition 3.2, (i), when applied to the isomorphismH2(G, μ ˆZ(MTM))
∼
→ ˆZ,i st ob e
understood in the sense of a“compatibility”, relative todividing the “ˆZ” that ap-
pears as the codomain of these isomorphisms by afactor given by theindex of the
image of the induced open homomorphism on arithmetic Galois groups [cf. Deﬁni-
tion 3.1, (ii)]. A similar remark [cf. Remark 1.10.1, (i)] applies to the cyclotome
“μ ˆZ(Π)” that appears in Proposition 3.2, (ii). We leave the routine details to the
reader.
In a similar vein, one may considerKummer maps for “O×” [as opposed to
“O⊿”], in which case the natural isomorphism of Remark 3.2.1 isonly determined
up to a ˆZ×-multiple [cf. [Mzk17], Remark 2.4.2].
Proposition 3.3. (Unit Kummer Maps) Let T ∈{TLG,TCG}.L e t(Π↷
M)∈Ob(CMLF
T ) be anMLF-Galois T-pair, with arithmetic Galois groupΠ↠ G.
Then:
(i) By considering the action of open subgroupsH ⊆Πon elements ofM that
are roots of elements ofMH [i.e., the subgroup of M consisting of H-invariant
elements], we obtain a functorial [i.e., relative to CMLF
T , in the evident sense]
algorithm for constructing theKummer maps
MH →H1(H, μ ˆZ(M)); M →lim−→J
H1(J, μ ˆZ(M))
—w h e r e“J” ranges over the open subgroups ofΠ. In this situation [unlike the
situation of Proposition 3.2, (ii)], the natural isomorphismμ ˆZ(M)
∼
→μ ˆZ(G) [cf.
Remark 3.2.1] isonly determined up to a{±1}- (respectively,ˆZ×-)multiple if
T = TLG (respectively, T = TCG) [cf. (ii) below; [Mzk17], Remark 2.4.2, in the
case T = TCG].

74 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(ii) If (Π∗↷ M∗) ∈Ob(CMLF
T ), then any isomorphism(Π↷ M)
∼
→(Π∗↷
M∗) induces isomorphismsΠ
∼
→Π∗, μ ˆZ(M)
∼
→μ ˆZ(M∗), which determine anin-
jection
IsomCMLF
T
((Π↷ M),(Π∗↷ M∗)) ↪→IsomTG(Π,Π∗)×IsomTG(μ ˆZ(M), μ ˆZ(M∗))
— which is a bijection if T = TCG.I f T = TLG, then the homomorphism
IsomCMLF
T
((Π↷ M),(Π∗↷ M∗)) →IsomTG(Π,Π∗) is surjective, with ﬁbers of
cardinality two.
Proof. The portion of assertion (i) concerningKummer maps is immediate from
the deﬁnitions and the references quoted. The portion of assertion (i) concerning
theisomorphism μ ˆZ(M)
∼
→μ ˆZ(G) follows by observing that thealgorithmof Propo-
sition 3.2, (i) [cf. also Remark 3.2.1] may be applied, up to a{±1}- (respectively,
ˆZ×-)indeterminacy,i f T = TLG (respectively, T = TCG). The injectivity portion
of assertion (ii) follows from assertion (i) via a similar argument to the argument
used to derive the injectivity portion of Proposition 3.2, (iv), from Proposition 3.2,
(i), (ii); the surjectivity onto IsomTG(Π,Π∗) follows from a similar argument to
the argument applied to prove the surjectivity portion of Proposition 3.2, (iv). If
T = TCG (respectively, T = TLG), then the remainder of assertion (ii) follows by
observing that there is a natural action ofˆZ× on M (respectively, observing that
as soon as an automorphism of (Π↷ M) preserves the submonoidO⊿
k ⊆k
× ∼= M
[i.e., preserves the“positive elements”ofk
×
/O×
k
∼= Q], one may apply the functorial
algorithm of Proposition 3.2, (i)).⃝
Lemma 3.4. (Topological Distinguishability of Additive and Mul-
tiplicative Structures) In the notation of Deﬁnition 3.1, (i), letα: k× ∼
→k×
be anautomorphism of the topological groupk×, αpf :( k×)pf →(k×)pf the
automorphism induced on the perfection. Thenαpf((O⊿
k )pf)̸⊆(O×
k )pf.
Proof. Indeed, sinceO×
k is easily veriﬁed to be themaximal compact subgroupof
k×, αinduces an isomorphismO×
k
∼
→O×
k .T h u s ,αpf((O×
k )pf)=( O×
k )pf,s oa ni n -
clusion αpf((O⊿
k )pf)⊆(O×
k )pf would imply that (O⊿
k )pf ⊆(O×
k )pf, a contradiction.
⃝
Deﬁnition 3.5.
(i) We shall refer to as adiagram of categoriesD =( ⃗ΓD,{Dv},{De})a n y
collection of data as follows:
(a) an oriented graph⃗ΓD [cf. §0];
(b) for each vertex v of ⃗ΓD,a categoryDv;
(c) for eachedgee of ⃗ΓD that runs from a vertexv1 t oav e r t e xv2,a functor
De :Dv1 →Dv2.
Let D =( ⃗ΓD,{Dv},{De}) be a diagram of categories. Then observe that anypath
[γ][ c f .§0] on ⃗ΓD that runs from a vertexv1 t oav e r t e xv2 determines — i.e.,

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 75
by composing the various functors “De”, for edgese that appear in this path — a
functor D[γ] : Dv1 →Dv2. We shall refer to the diagram of categoriesE obtained
by restricting the data ofD to an oriented subgraph⃗ΓE of ⃗ΓD as asubdiagram of
categoriesof D.
(ii) LetD =( ⃗ΓD,{Dv},{De}) be a diagram of categories. Then we shall refer
to as afamily of homotopiesH =( EH,{ζϖ})o nD any collection of data as follows:
(a) a saturated[cf. §0] setEH ⊆Ω(⃗ΓD)×Ω(⃗ΓD) of ordered pairs of paths on
⃗ΓD, which we shall refer to as theboundary setof the family of homotopies
H; we shall refer to every path on⃗ΓD that occurs as a component of an
element ofEH as aboundary set path;
(b) for each ϖ =( [γ1],[γ2]) ∈EH,a natural transformationζϖ : D[γ1] →
D[γ2] — which we shall refer to as ahomotopy from [γ1]t o[ γ2]—s u c h
that the following conditions are satisﬁed:ζ([γ],[γ]) is theidentity natural
transformation for each ([γ],[γ])∈EH;i fϖ =( [γ1],[γ2]), ϖ′ =( [γ2],[γ3]),
and ϖ′′ =( [γ1],[γ3]) belong to EH,t h e nζϖ′′ = ζϖ′ ◦ζϖ; if, for some
[γ3],[γ4]∈Ω(⃗ΓD), the pairsϖ =( [γ1],[γ2]) andϖ′ =( [γ3]◦[γ1]◦[γ4],[γ3]◦
[γ2]◦[γ4]) belong toEH,t h e nζϖ′ =D[γ3] ◦ζϖ ◦D[γ4].
If, in this situation,EH is thesmallest [cf. §0] saturated subset of Ω(⃗ΓD)×Ω(⃗ΓD)
that contains a given subsetE∗
H ⊆EH, then we shall say that the family of ho-
motopies H =( EH,{ζϖ})i s generated by the homotopies indexed byE∗
H.W e
shall refer to a family of homotopiesH =( EH,{ζϖ})o n D as symmetric if EH
is symmetrically saturated[cf. §0]. [Thus, if H =( EH,{ζϖ}) is symmetric, then
every ζϖ is an isomorphism.] We shall refer to a collection of families of homo-
topies {Hι=( EHι,{ζι
ϖι})}ι∈I on D as beingcompatibleif there exists a family of
homotopies H =( EH,{ζϖ})o nD such that, for eachι∈I, ϖι∈EHι,w eh a v e
EHι⊆EH and ζι
ϖι = ζϖι.
(iii) LetD =( ⃗ΓD,{Dv},{De}) be a diagram of categories. Then we shall refer
to as anobservable S =(S,v S,H) [on D] any collection of data as follows:
(a) a diagram of categoriesS =( ⃗ΓS,{Sv},{Se}) that containsD as asubdi-
agram of categories[so ⃗ΓD ⊆⃗ΓS];
(b) a vertexvS of ⃗ΓS, which we shall refer to as theobservation vertex,s u c h
that the set of vertices of⃗ΓS\⃗ΓD is equal to{vS},a n d ,m o r e o v e r ,e v e r y
edge of⃗ΓS\⃗ΓD runs from a vertex of⃗ΓD to vS;
(c) a family of homotopiesH on S such that every boundary set path ofH
has terminal vertexequal tovS.
Let S =(S,v S,H)b ea no b s e r v a b l eo nD. Then we shall say thatS is symmetric
ifH is symmetric. We shall say thatS is acore [onD] if the boundary set ofH is
equal to the set ofall co-verticial pairs of paths on the underlying oriented graph
⃗ΓS ofS with terminal vertex equal tovS [which implies thatS is symmetric], and,
moreover, every vertex of⃗ΓD appears as the initial vertex of a path on⃗ΓS with
terminal vertex equal tovS. Suppose thatS is acoreonD. Then we shall refer to

76 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
the observation vertex ofS as thecore vertexof S and [by abuse of terminology,
when there is no fear of confusion] toSvS as a“core onD”.
(iv)Let S =(S,v S,H)bea coreonadiagramofcategories D =( ⃗ΓD,{Dv},{De}).
Then we shall refer to as atelecore T =(T ,J)o nD over the coreS any collection
of data as follows:
(a) a diagram of categoriesT =( ⃗ΓT ,{Tv},{Te}) that containsS as asubdi-
agram of categories[so ⃗ΓD ⊆⃗ΓS ⊆⃗ΓT ] such that⃗ΓT , ⃗ΓS have thesame
vertices, and, moreover, every edge of⃗ΓT \⃗ΓS runs fromvS t oav e r t e xo f
⃗ΓD; we shall refer to such edges of⃗ΓT as thetelecore edges;
(b) J is afamily of homotopieson T such thatJ|S =H whose boundary
set is equal to the subset of Ω(⃗ΓT )o fp a i r s( [γ3]◦[γ1],[γ3]◦[γ2]), where
([γ1],[γ2]) is a co-verticial pair of paths on⃗ΓT with terminal vertex equal
to vS,a n d[γ3]i sap a t ho n⃗ΓT with initial vertex equal tovS.
In this situation, a family of homotopiesHcnct onT that iscompatiblewithJ will
be referred to as acontact structurefor the telecoreT .
(v) LetD =( ⃗ΓD,{Dv},{De})a n dD′ =( ⃗ΓD′,{D′v′},{De′})b e diagrams of
categories.T h e na1-morphism of diagrams of categories
Φ:D→D ′
is deﬁned to be a collection of data follows:
(a) a morphism of oriented graphsΦ⃗Γ: ⃗ΓD →⃗ΓD′;
(b) for each vertex v of ⃗ΓD,a functor Φv :Dv →D′Φ⃗Γ(v);
(c) for each edge e of ⃗ΓD that runs from a vertex v1 t oav e r t e xv2,a n
isomorphism of functorsΦe :D′Φ⃗Γ(e) ◦Φv1
∼
→Φv2 ◦De.
A2 -morphism Θ:Φ →Ψ between 1-morphisms Φ,Ψ: D→D ′ such that Φ⃗Γ=Ψ⃗Γ
is deﬁned to be a collection of natural transformations{Θv :Φv →Ψv},w h e r ev
ranges over the vertices of⃗ΓD, such that
Ψe ◦(D′
Φ⃗Γ(e) ◦Θv1)=( Θv2 ◦De)◦Φe :D′
Φ⃗Γ(e) ◦Φv1 →Ψv2 ◦De
for each edge e of ⃗ΓD that runs from a vertexv1 to a vertex v2.W e s h a l l s a y
that a 1-morphism Φ :D→D ′ is anequivalence of diagrams of categoriesif there
exists a 1-morphism Ψ :D′ →D such that Ψ◦Φ, Φ◦Ψ are [2-]isomorphic to the
respective identity 1-morphisms ofD, D′.I f D (respectively,D′) is equipped with
a family of homotopiesH (respectively,H′), then we shall say that an equivalence
Φ:D
∼
→D′ iscompatiblewithH,H′ if Φ⃗Γinduces a bijection between the boundary
sets ofH, H′, and, moreover, the natural transformations that constituteH, H′
[cf. the data of (ii), (b)] are compatible [in the evident sense] with the natural
transformations that constitute Φ [cf. the data (c) in the above deﬁnition]; in this
situation, one veriﬁes immediately that if Φ is compatible withH, H′,t h e ns oi s
any equivalence Ψ :D
∼
→D′ that is isomorphic to Φ. We shall say thatD is vertex-
rigid (respectively,edge-rigid) if, for every vertexv (respectively, edgee)o f⃗ΓD,t h e

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 77
category Dv (respectively, the functorDe) is id-rigid (respectively, rigid) [cf.§0].
If D is vertex-rigid and edge-rigid, then we shall say thatD is totally rigid.T h u s ,
if D is edge-rigid, then any equivalence Φ :D
∼
→D′ is completely determinedby
Φ⃗Γ and the{Φv} [i.e., the data (a), (b) in the above deﬁnition]. In a similar vein,
if D is vertex-rigid, then any two isomorphic equivalences Φ,Ψ: D
∼
→D′ admit a
unique [2-]isomorphism Φ
∼
→Ψ. In particular, ifD is vertex-rigid, then it is natural
to speak of theautomorphism group Aut(D)o fD, i.e., the group determined by
the isomorphism classes of self-equivalencesof D.
(vi) LetD =( ⃗ΓD,{Dv},{De})b ea diagram of categories; □ a nexus of ⃗ΓD [cf.
§0]; D≤□, D≥□ the subdiagrams of categoriesdetermined, respectively, by thepre-
and post-nexus portionsof ⃗ΓD [cf. §0]. Then we shall say thatD is totally □-rigid if
the pre-nexus portionD≤□ is totally rigid. Let us suppose thatD is totally □-rigid.
Write
Aut□(D≤□)⊆Aut(D≤□)
for the subgroup of isomorphism classes of self-equivalences ofD≤□ that preserve
□ and induce a self-equivalence of D□ that is isomorphic to the identity self-
equivalence. Let Φ≤□ :D≤□
∼
→D≤□ be a self-equivalence whose isomorphism class
[Φ≤□] ∈Aut□(D≤□). Then Φ≤□ extends naturally to an equivalence Φ :D
∼
→D
which is theidentity on ⃗ΓD≥□ and which associates to each vertexv ̸= □ of ⃗ΓD≥□
the identity self-equivalence ofDv. [Here, we observe that the isomorphism of func-
tors of (v), (c), is naturally determined by the isomorphism of (Φ≤□)□ with the
identity self-equivalence ofD□.] Moreover, this assignment
Φ≤□ ↦→Φ
clearly maps isomorphic equivalences to isomorphic equivalences and is compatible
with composition of equivalences. In particular, this assignment yields a natu-
ral “action”of the group Aut□(D≤□)o nD. We shall refer to the resulting self-
equivalences ofD as nexus self-equivalencesof D [relative to the nexus□]a n dt h e
resulting classes of self-equivalences ofD [i.e., arising from isomorphism classes of
“Φ≤□”] asnexus-classes of self-equivalencesof D [relative to the nexus□].
Remark 3.5.1. If one just works withdiagrams of categorieswithout considering
any observables, then it is diﬃcult to understand the“global structure”of the
diagram since [by deﬁnition!] itdoes not make senseto speak of the relationship
between objects that belong todiﬀerent categories[e.g., at distinct vertices of the
diagram]. Thus:
The notion of anobservable may be thought of as a sort of“partial pro-
jection of the dynamics of a diagram of categories”onto asingle category,
within which it makes sense to compare objects that arise from distinct
categories at distinct vertices of the diagram.
Moreover:
A coreon a diagram of categories may be thought of as an extraction of a
certain portion of the data of the objects at the various categories in the

78 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
diagram that isinvariant with respect to the “dynamics” arising from the
application of the various functors in the diagram.
Put another way, one may think of a core as a sort of“constant portion”of the
diagram that lies, in a consistent fashion,“under the entire diagram”[cf. the use
of the term “core” in the theory of [Mzk11],§2]. Then:
A telecoremay be thought of as a sort ofpartial section— i.e., given by
the telecore edges— of the “structure morphisms to the core” which does
not disturb thecoricity [i.e., the property of being a core] of the original
core.
Moreover, although, in the deﬁnition of a telecore, we do not assume the existence
of families of homotopies that guarantee the compatibility of applying composites
of functors by traveling alongarbitrary co-verticial pairs of paths emanating from
the core vertex,a n yfailure of such a compatibilitymay always beeliminated —
in a fashion reminiscent of a “telescoping sum”—b yp r o j e c t i n gb a c kd o w nt o
the core vertex[cf. the discussion of Remark 3.6.1, (ii), (c), below]. Put another
way, one may think of a telecore as a device that satisﬁes a sort of “time lag
compatibility”, i.e., as a device whose “compatibility apparatus” does not go into
operationimmediately, butonlyafteracertain“timelag”[arisingfromthenecessity
to travel back down to the core vertex]. Also, for more on the meaning of cores and
telecores, we refer to Remark 3.6.5 below.
The terminology of Deﬁnition 3.5 makes it possible to formulate theﬁrst main
result of the present§3.
Corollary 3.6. (MLF-Galois-theoretic Mono-anabelian Log-Frobenius
Compatibility) Write
X
def
= CMLF-sB
T ; E
def
= TGsB; N
def
= C
MLF-sB
TS
— where [in the notation of Deﬁnition 3.1]T∈{TM,TF}. Consider thediagram
of categoriesD
... X
log
−→ X
log
−→ X ...
... id⋎+1 ↘
⏐⏐↓id⋎ ↙ id⋎−1 ...
X
⏐⏐↓λ×
⏐⏐↓λ×pf
N
⏐⏐↓
E
⏐⏐↓κAn
Anab
⏐⏐↓
E

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 79
— where we use the notation “log”, “λ×”, “λ×pf” for the evident [double-underlined/
overlined] restrictions of the arrows “logT,T”, “λ×”, “λ×pf” of Deﬁnition 3.1, (iv)
[cf. also Proposition 3.2, (iii), (v)]; for positive integersn≤6, we shall denote by
D≤n the subdiagram of categories of D determined by theﬁrst n [of the six]
rows of D; we write L for the countably ordered set determined [cf.§0] by the
inﬁnite linear oriented graph⃗Γopp
D≤1
[so the elements ofL correspond to vertices
of theﬁrst row ofD]a n d
L† def
= L ∪{□}
for the ordered set obtained by appending toL a formal symbol □ [which we think
of as corresponding to the unique vertex of thesecond row ofD] such that□ < ⋎,
for all ⋎ ∈L; id⋎ denotes the identity functor at the vertex⋎ ∈L; the notation
“... ” denotes an inﬁnite repetition of the evident pattern. Then:
(i) Forn =4 ,5,6, D≤n admits a natural structure ofcore onD≤n−1. That is
to say, loosely speaking,E, Anab “form cores” of the functors inD.
(ii) The assignments
(
Π,Π↷{k
×
↪→lim−→J
H1(J, μ ˆZ(Π))}
)
↦→(Π↷O⊿
k ), (Π↷ k
× ⋃
{0})
determine [i.e., for each choice ofT]a natural “forgetful” functor
Anab
φAn
−→ X
which is an equivalence of categories, a quasi-inverse for which is given by
the composite πAn : X→ Anab of the natural projection functorX→E with
κAn :E→ Anab; writeηAn : φAn◦πAn
∼
→idX for the isomorphism arising from the
“group-theoretic” algorithms of Corollary 1.10 [cf. also Proposition 3.2, (ii), (iii)].
Moreover, φAn gives rise to atelecore structure TAn on D≤4, whose underlying
diagram of categories we denote byDAn, by appending toD≤5 telecore edges
Anab
... φ⋎+1 ↙
⏐⏐
↓
φ⋎ ↘ φ⋎−1 ...
... X
log
−→ X
log
−→ X ...
Anab
φ□
−→ X
from thecore Anab to the various copies ofX inD≤2 given by copies ofφAn,w h i c h
we denote byφ⋏,f o r⋏ ∈L†. That is to say, loosely speaking,φAn determines a
telecore structure onD≤4. Finally, for each ⋏∈L†, let us write[β0
⋏] for the path
on ⃗ΓDAn of length 0 at ⋏ and [β1
⋏] for the path on⃗ΓDAn of length ∈{4,5} [i.e.,
depending on whether or not ⋏ = □] that starts from ⋏, descends [say, viaλ×]
to the core vertex “Anab”, and returns to⋏ via the telecore edgeφ⋏. Then the
collection of natural transformations
{η□⋎,η−1
□⋎,η⋏,η−1
⋏ }⋎∈L,⋏∈L†

80 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
— where we writeη□⋎ for the identity natural transformation from the arrowφ□ :
Anab→X to the composite arrowid⋎ ◦φ⋎ : Anab→X and
η⋏ :(DAn)[β1
⋏]
∼
→(DAn)[β0
⋏]
for the isomorphism arising fromηAn — generate acontact structureHAn on
the telecoreTAn.
(iii) The natural transformations
ιlog,⋎ : λ× ◦id⋎ ◦log→λ×pf ◦id⋎+1,ι × : λ× →λ×pf
[cf. Deﬁnition 3.1, (iv)] belong to afamily of homotopiesonD≤3 that determines
onD≤3 a structure ofobservable Slog onD≤2 and, moreover, iscompatible with
the families of homotopies that constitute thecore and telecore structures of (i),
(ii).
(iv) The diagram of categoriesD≤2 does not admit a structure of core on
D≤1 which [i.e., whose constituent family of homotopies] iscompatible with [the
constituent family of homotopies of] theobservable Slog of (iii). Moreover, the
telecore structure TAn of (ii), the contact structure HAn of (ii), and the
observable Slog of (iii) arenot simultaneously compatible[but cf. Remark
3.7.3, (ii), below].
(v) The unique vertex □ of the second row ofD is a nexus of ⃗ΓD.M o r e -
over, D is totally □-rigid, and the natural action of Z on the inﬁnite linear
oriented graph⃗ΓD≤1 extends to an action ofZ on D by nexus-classes of self-
equivalences of D. Finally, the self-equivalences in these nexus-classes arecom-
patible with thefamilies of homotopiesthat constitute thecores and observ-
able of (i), (iii); these self-equivalences also extend naturally [cf. the technique of
extension applied in Deﬁnition 3.5, (vi)] to the diagram of categories [cf. Deﬁnition
3.5, (iv), (a)] that constitutes thetelecore of (ii), in a fashion that iscompatible
with both the family of homotopies that constitutes this telecore structure [cf.
Deﬁnition 3.5, (iv), (b)] and thecontact structureHAn of (ii).
Proof. In the following, ifφis a functor appearing inD, then let us write [φ]
for the path on the underlying oriented graph⃗ΓD of D determined by the edge
corresponding toφ[cf. §0]. Now assertion (i) is immediate from the deﬁnitions and
the fact that the algorithms of Corollary 1.10 are“group-theoretic”in the sense
that they are expressed in language that depends only on the proﬁnite group given
as “input data”.
Next, we consider assertion (ii). The portion of assertion (ii) concerningφAn
and TAn is immediate from the deﬁnitions and the“group-theoretic”algorithms of
Corollary 1.10 [cf. also Proposition 3.2, (ii), (iii)]. Thus, it suﬃces to show the
existence of a contact structure HAn as described. To this end, let us ﬁrst ob-
serve that theisomorphism of log with the identity functor[cf. Deﬁnition 3.1, (iv);
Proposition 3.2, (v)] iscompatible[in the evident sense] with the natural tranforma-
tions {η□⋎,η−1
□⋎,η⋏,η−1
⋏ }⋎∈L,⋏∈L† . On the other hand, this compatibility implies
that one may, in eﬀect,“contract”D≤2 down to asingle vertex[equipped with the

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 81
category X] and the various paths from□ to Anab down to asingle edge— i.e.,
that, up toredundancies, one is, in eﬀect, dealing with a diagram of categories with
two vertices “X”a n d“Anab” joined bytwo [oriented] edgesφAn, πAn.N o w t h e
existence of a family of homotopies that contains the collection of natural transfor-
mations {η□⋎,η⋏,η−1
⋏ }⋎∈L,⋏∈L† follows immediately. This completes the proof of
assertion (ii).
Next, we consider assertion (iii). Write Elog for the set of ordered pairs of
paths on ⃗ΓD≤3 [i.e., the underlying oriented graph ofD≤3] consisting of pairs of
paths of the following three types:
(1) ([λ×]◦[id⋎]◦[log]◦[γ],[λ×pf]◦[id⋎+1]◦[γ]), where [γ]i sap a t ho nD≤3
whose terminal vertex lies in theﬁrst rowof D≤3;
(2) ([λ×]◦[γ],[λ×pf]◦[γ]), where [γ]i sap a t ho nD≤3 whose terminal vertex
lies in thesecond rowof D≤3;
(3) ([ γ],[γ]), where [γ]i sap a t ho nD≤3 whose terminal vertex lies in the
third rowof D≤3.
Then one veriﬁes immediately thatElog satisﬁes the conditions (a), (b), (c), (d),
(e) given in§0 for asaturated set. Moreover, the natural transformation(s)ιlog,⋎
(respectively, ι×) determine(s) the homotopies for pairs of paths of type (1) (re-
spectively, (2)). Thus, we obtain anobservable Slog, as desired. Moreover, it is
immediate from the deﬁnitions — i.e., in essence, because the variousGalois groups
thatappearremain “undisturbed”bythevariousmanipulationsinvolving arithmetic
data that arise from “ιlog,⋎”, “ι×” — that this family of homotopies iscompatible
with the families of homotopies that constitute thecore and telecorestructures of
(i), (ii). This completes the proof of assertion (iii).
Next, we consider assertion (iv). Suppose thatD≤2 admits a structure ofcore
on D≤1 in a fashion that is compatible with the observable Slog of (iii). Then
this core structure determines, for ⋎ ∈L,ah o m o t o p yζ0 for the pair of paths
([id⋎+1],[id⋎]◦[log]); thus, by composing the resultζ′
0 of applyingλ× to ζ0 with
the homotopyζ1 associated [viaSlog] to the pair of paths ([λ×]◦[id⋎]◦[log],[λ×pf]◦
[id⋎+1]) [of type (1)], we obtain a natural transformation
ζ′
1 = ζ1 ◦ζ′
0 : λ× ◦id⋎+1 →λ×pf ◦id⋎+1
— which, in order for the desiredcompatibility to hold, must coincide with the
homotopyζ2 associated [viaSlog] to the pair of paths ([λ×]◦[id⋎+1],[λ×pf]◦[id⋎+1])
[of type (2)]. On the other hand, by writing out explicitly the meaning of such an
equality ζ′
1 = ζ2, we conclude that we obtain acontradiction to Lemma 3.4. This
completes the proof of theﬁrst incompatibilityof assertion (iv). The proof of the
second incompatibilityof assertion (iv) is entirely similar. That is to say, if we
compose on the right with[φ⋎+1] the various paths that appeared in the proof of
the ﬁrst incompatibility, then in order to apply the argument applied in the proof
of the ﬁrst incompatibility, it suﬃces torelate the paths
[id⋎+1]◦[φ⋎+1]; [id ⋎]◦[log]◦[φ⋎+1]

82 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
[a task that was achieved in the proof of the ﬁrst incompatibility by applying the
core structurewhose existence was assumed in the proof of the ﬁrst incompatibility].
In the present situation, applying the homotopyη□⋎+1 of thecontact structureHAn
yieldsahomotopy[ φ□] ⇝ [id⋎+1]◦[φ⋎+1]; ontheotherhand, weobtainahomotopy
[φ□] ⇝ [id⋎]◦[φ⋎] ⇝ [id⋎]◦[β1
⋎]◦[log]◦[φ⋎+1]
⇝ [id⋎]◦[log]◦[φ⋎+1]
by applying the homotopyη□⋎ of thecontact structureHAn, followed by the homo-
topiesofthe telecoreTAn, followedbythehomotopy η⋎ ofthe contact structureHAn.
Thus, by applying the argument applied in the proof of the ﬁrst incompatibility, we
obtain two mutually contradictory homotopies[λ×]◦[φ□] ⇝ [λ×pf]◦[id⋎+1]◦[φ⋎+1].
This completes the proof of thesecond incompatibilityof assertion (iv).
Finally, we consider assertion (v). The total □-rigidity in question follows
immediately from Proposition 3.2, (iv) [cf. also the ﬁnal portion of Proposition 3.2,
(v)]. The remainder of assertion (v) follows immediately from the deﬁnitions. This
completes the proof of assertion (v).⃝
Remark 3.6.1.
(i) The“output”of the“log-Frobenius observable”Slog of Corollary 3.6, (iii),
may be summarizedintuitively in the following diagram:
... Π⋎+1
∼
→ Π⋎+1
∼
→ Π⋎
∼
→ Π⋎
↷↷ ↷ ↷ ...
... k
×
⋎+1 → (k
×
⋎+1)pf ←↩ k
×
⋎ → (k
×
⋎)pf
∼
→ Π⋎−1
∼
→ Π⋎−1 ...
... ↷↷
←↩ k
×
⋎−1 → (k
×
⋎−1)pf ...
— where the arrows “→” are the natural morphisms [cf.ι×!]; k
×
⋎,f o r⋎∈L,i sa
copy of “k
×
” that arises, via id⋎, from the vertex⋎ ofD≤1; the arrows “←↩”a r et h e
inclusions arising from the fact thatk
×
⋎ is obtained by applying thelog-Frobenius
functor log to k
×
⋎+1 [cf. ιlog,⋎!]; the isomorphic “Π⋎’s” that act on the various
k
×
⋎’s and their perfections correspond to thecoricity of E [cf. Corollary 3.6, (i)].
Finally, theincompatibility assertions of Corollary 3.6, (iv), may be thought of as
a statement of thenon-existence of some“universal reference model”
k
×
model
that maps isomorphically to the variousk
×
⋎’s in a fashion that iscompatible with
the various arrows “→”, “←↩” of the above diagram — cf. also Corollary 3.7, (iv),
below.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 83
(ii) In words, the content of Corollary 3.6 may be summarized as follows [cf.
the “intuitive diagram”of (i)]:
(a) The Galois groupsthat act on the various objects under consideration
are compatiblewith all of theoperationsinvolved — in particular, the op-
erations constituted by the functorslog, κAn, φAn and the various related
families of homotopies — cf. thecoricity asserted in Corollary 3.6, (i).
(b) By contrast, the operation constituted by thelog-Frobenius functor[as
“observed” via theobservable Slog]i snot compatiblewith theﬁeld struc-
ture of the ﬁelds [i.e., “k”] involved [cf. Corollary 3.6, (iv)].
(c) As a consequence of (a), the“group-theoretic reconstruction”of the base
ﬁeld via Corollary 1.10 iscompatible with all of the operations involved,
except “momentarily”when log acts on the output ofφAn —a no p e r a t i o n
which“temporarily obliterates”the ﬁeld structure of this output, although
this ﬁeld structure may be recovered by projecting back down toE [cf. (a)]
and applyingκAn. This sort of“conditional compatibility”— i.e., up to a
“brief temporary exception”— is expressed in thetelecoricity asserted in
Corollary 3.6, (ii).
In particular, if one thinks of the various operations involved as being“software”
[cf. Remark 1.9.8], then the projection toE — i.e., the operation of looking at the
Galois group— is compatible withsimultaneous executionof all the “software”
[in particular, including log!] under consideration; the “group-theoreticity”of the
algorithms of Corollary 1.10 implies thatAnab, κAn satisfy a similar“compatibility
with simultaneous execution of all software”[cf. Remark 3.1.2] property.
Remark 3.6.2.
(i) The reasoning that lies behind the name“log-Frobenius functor”may be
understood as follows. At a very naive level, the natural logarithm may be thought
of as a sort of“raising to theϵ-th power”[where ϵ→0 is some indeﬁnite positive
inﬁnitesimal] — i.e., “ϵ” plays the role in characteristic [ϵ →]0 of “p”i nc h a r a c -
teristic p> 0. More generally, the logarithm frequently appears in the context of
Frobenius actions, in particular in discussions involvingcanonical coordinates,s u c h
as in [Mzk1], Chapter III,§1.
(ii) In general, Frobenius morphisms may be thought of as“compression mor-
phisms”. For instance, this phenomenon may be seen in the most basic example of
a Frobenius morphism in characteristicp> 0, i.e., the morphism
t↦→tp
on Fp[t]. Put another way, the “compression” operation inherent in a Frobenius
morphism may be thought of as anapproximation of some sort of“absolute con-
stant object”[such as Fp]. In the context of the log-Frobenius functor, this sort
of compression phenomenon may be seen in thepre-log-shells deﬁned in Deﬁnition
3.1, (iv), which will play akey rolein the theory of§5b e l o w .

84 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(iii) Whereas the log-Frobenius functorobliterates the ﬁeld[or ring]structure
[cf. Remark 3.6.1, (ii), (b)] of the ﬁelds involved, the usual Frobenius morphism in
positive characteristic is compatible with the ring structure of the rings involved.
On the other hand, unlike generically smooth morphisms, the Frobenius morphism
in positive characteristic has the eﬀect of“obliterating the diﬀerentials”of the
schemes involved.
Remark 3.6.3. The diagramD of Corollary 3.6 — cf., especially, the ﬁrst two
rows D≤2 and the variousnatural actions ofZ discussed in Corollary 3.6, (v) —
may be thought of as a sort ofcombinatorial version of Gm — cf. the point of
view of Remark 1.9.7.
Remark 3.6.4. One veriﬁes immediately that one may give atempered version
of Propositions 3.2, 3.3; Corollary 3.6 [cf. Remarks 1.9.1, 1.10.2].
Remark 3.6.5. The notions of “core” and “telecore” are reminiscent of certain
aspects of“Hensel’s lemma”[cf., e.g., [Mzk21], Lemma 2.1]. That is to say, if one
compares the successive approximation operationapplied in the proof of Hensel’s
lemma [cf., e.g., the proof of [Mzk21], Lemma 2.1] to the variousoperations[in the
form of functors] that appear in a diagram of categories, then one is led to the
following analogy:
cores ←→sets of solutions of “´etale”, i.e.,“slope zero”equations
telecores ←→sets of solutions of“positive slope”equations
— i.e., where one thinks of applications of Hensel’s lemma in the context ofmixed
characteristic, so the property of being “´etale in characteristic p> 0” may be
regarded as corresponding to “slope zero”. That is to say, the“´etale case”of
Hensel’s lemma is the easiest to understand. In this “´etale case”, theinvertibil-
ity of the Jacobian matrix involved implies that when one executes each successive
approximation operation, the set of solutionslifts uniquely, i.e.,“transports isomor-
phically”through the operation. This sort of “isomorphic transport” is reminiscent
of the deﬁnition of acoreon a diagram of categories. On the other hand, the“pos-
itive slope case”of Hensel’s lemma is a bit more complicated [cf., e.g., the proof of
[Mzk21], Lemma 2.1]. That is to say, although the set of solutions does not quite
“transport isomorphically” in the simplest most transparent fashion, the fact that
the Jacobian matrix involved isinvertible up to a factor ofp implies that the set
of solutions“essentially transports isomorphically, up to a brief temporary lag”—
cf. the “brief temporary exception”of Remark 3.6.1, (ii), (c). Put another way, if
one thinks in terms ofconnectionson bases on whichp is nilpotent, in which case
formal integrationtakes the place of the “successive approximation operation” of
Hensel’s lemma, then one has the followinganalogy:
cores ←→vanishing pn-curvature
telecores ←→nilpotent pn-curvature
[where we refer to [Mzk4], Chapter II,§2; [Mzk7],§2.4, for more on “pn-curvature”]
— cf. Remark 3.7.2 below.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 85
Remark 3.6.6.
(i) In the context of the analogy between telecores and “positive slope situa-
tions” discussed in Remark 3.6.5, one question that may occur to some readers is
the following:
What are thevalues of the positive slopes implicitly involved in a telecore?
At the time of writing, it appears to the author that, relative to this analogy, one
shouldregardtelecores ascontaining “all positive slopes”, or, alternatively,“positive
slopes of an indeterminate nature”, which one may think of as corresponding to the
lengths of the various paths emanating from thecore vertexthat one may travel
along before descending back down to the core [cf. Remark 3.5.1]. Indeed, from the
point of view of the analogy [discussed in Remark 3.7.2 below] with theuniformizing
MF∇-objects constructed in [Mzk1], [Mzk4], this is natural, since uniformizing
MF∇-objects also involve, in eﬀect, “all positive slopes”. Moreover, since telecores
are of an“abstract, combinatorial nature”[cf. Remark 1.9.7] — i.e., not of a“linear,
module-theoretic nature”, as is the case withMF∇-objects — it seems somewhat
natural that this“combinatorial non-linearity”should interfere with any attempts
to “separate out the various distinct positive slopes”, via, for instance, a “linear
ﬁltration”, as is often possible in the case ofMF∇-objects.
(ii) From the point of view of the analogy with [uniformizing]MF∇-objects,
one has the following [rough] correspondence:
slope zero ←→Frobenius“↷”(an isomorphism)
positive slope ←→Frobenius“↷”pn· (an isomorphism)
[where “↷” is to be understood as shorthand for the phrase “acts via”;n is a
positive integer]. Perhaps the most fundamental example in thep-adic theory of
such a [uniformizing] MF∇-object arises from the p-adic Galois representation
obtained by extractingp-power roots of the standard unitU on the multiplicative
group Gm over Zp, in which case the“positive slope”involved corresponds to the
action
dlog(U)= dU/U ↦→p·dlog(U)
induced by the Frobenius morphismU ↦→Up. In the situation of Corollary 3.6, an
analogue of this sort of correspondence may be seen in the“temporary failure of
coricity”[cf. Remark 3.6.1, (ii), (c); thefailure of coricitydocumented in Corollary
3.6, (iv)] of the“mono-anabelian telecore”of Corollary 3.6, (ii). That is to say,
mutiplication by a positive power of p corresponds precisely to this “temporary
failure of coricity”, a failure that isremedied [where the “remedy” corresponds
to the isomorphism that appears by“pealing oﬀ”an appropriate power ofp]b y
projecting back down toAnab, an operation which [in light of the“group-theoretic
nature”of the algorithms applied inκAn] induces anisomorphism of, for instance,
the base-ﬁeld reconstructedafter the application oflog with the base-ﬁeld that was
reconstructed prior to the application oflog.
Remark 3.6.7. Note that in the situation of Corollary 3.6 [cf. also the ter-
minology introduced in Deﬁnition 3.5], although we have formulated things in the

86 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
language ofcategoriesand functors, in fact, the mathematical constructs in which
we are ultimately interested have muchmore elaborate structuresthan categories
and functors. That is to say:
In fact, what we are really interested in is not so much “categories” and
“functors”, but rather“types of data”and “operations”[i.e., algorithms!]
that convert some “input type of data” into some “output type of data”.
One aspect of this state of aﬀairs may be seen in the fact that the crucial functors
log, κAn of Corollary 3.6 areequivalences of categories[which, moreover, are, in
certain cases,isomorphic to the identity functor! — cf. Deﬁnition 3.1, (iv), (vi)] —
i.e., from the point of view of thepurely category-theoretic structure[cf., e.g., the
point of view of [Mzk14], [Mzk16], [Mzk17]!] of “X”, “E”, or “Anab”, these functors
are “not doing anything”. On the other hand, from the point of view of “types of
data” and “operations” on these “types of data” [cf. Remark 3.6.1], the operations
constituted by the functorslog, κAn are highly nontrivial. To some extent, this state
of aﬀairs maybe remedied byworkingwith appropriateobservables[i.e., whichserve
to project the operations constituted by functors between diﬀerent categories down
into arrows in a single category — cf. Remark 3.5.1], as in Corollary 3.6, (iii), (iv).
Nevertheless, the use of observables does not constitute a fundamental solution
to the issue raised above. It is the hope of the author to remedy this state of
aﬀairs in a more deﬁnitive fashion in a future paper by introducing appropriate
“enhancements”to the usual theory of categories and functors.
To understand what is gained in Corollary 3.6 by themono-anabelian theory
of§1, it is useful to consider the following“bi-anabelian analogue”of Corollary 3.6.
Corollary 3.7. (MLF-Galois-theoretic Bi-anabelian Log-Frobenius In-
compatibility) In the notation and conventions of Corollary 3.6, suppose, further,
that T = TF. Consider thediagram of categoriesD†
... X× E X
logX
−→ X ×E X
logX
−→ X ×E X ...
... pr⋎+1 ↘
⏐⏐
↓
pr⋎ ↙ pr⋎−1 ...
X
⏐⏐
↓
λ×
⏐
⏐
↓
λ×pf
N
⏐⏐
↓
E
— where the second to fourth rows ofD
† are identical to the second to fourth rows
of the diagramD of Corollary 3.6;D†
≤1 is obtained by applying the“categorical
ﬁber product”(−)×EX [cf. §0] toD≤1; pr⋎ denotes theprojection to theﬁrst
factor on the copy ofX× E X at the vertex⋎∈L. Also, let us write
π⋎ :X× E X→X

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 87
for theprojection to thesecond factor on the copy ofX×EX at the vertex⋎∈L,
D‡
for the result of appending these arrows π⋎ to D† — where we think of the
codomain “X” of the arrowsπ⋎ as a new “core” vertexlying in the ﬁrst row
of D‡ “under”the various copies of “X× E X” at the vertices ofL —a n dD‡
≤n
[where n∈{1,2,3,4}] for the subdiagram ofD‡ constituted byD†
≤n, together with
the newly appended arrowsπ⋎.T h e n :
(i) D† = D†
≤4 (respectively,D‡
≤1) admits a natural structure ofcore on D†
≤3
(respectively,D†
≤1). That is to say, loosely speaking,E “forms a core” of the func-
tors inD†; the “second factor”X “forms a core” of the functors inD‡
≤1.[ T h u s ,
we think of thesecond factor of the various ﬁber product categoriesX× E X as
being a “universal reference model” — cf. Remark 3.7.3 below.]
(ii) Write
δX :X→X× E X
for the naturaldiagonal functorand
θbi :p rbi
1
∼
→prbi
2
for theisomorphism between thetwo projection functorsprbi
1 , prbi
2 :X×EX→
X that arises from thefunctoriality — i.e., thebi-anabelian [or “Grothendieck
Conjecture”-type] portion [cf. Remark 1.9.8] — of the “group-theoretic” algorithms
of Corollary 1.10. Then δX is an equivalence of categories, a quasi-inverse
for which is given by the projection to the second factorπX : X× E X→X ; θbi
determines an isomorphismθX : δX ◦πX
∼
→idX×EX. Moreover,δX gives rise to a
telecore structure TδonD†
≤1, whose underlying diagram of categories we denote
by D‡
δ, by appending toD‡
≤1 telecore edges
X
... δ⋎+1 ↙
⏐⏐↓δ⋎ ↘ δ⋎−1 ...
... X× E X
logX
−→ X ×E X
logX
−→ X ×E X ...
from the core X to the various copies ofX× E X in D†
≤1 given by copies ofδX,
w h i c hw ed e n o t eb yδ⋎,f o r⋎∈L. That is to say, loosely speaking,δX determines
a telecore structure onD†
≤1. Finally, let us writeD∗for the diagram of categories
obtained bygluing [in the evident sense]D‡
δtoD‡ alongD‡
≤1 and thenappending
an edge
X
δ□
−→ X
from the core vertex ofD‡
δto the vertex at□ [i.e., the unique vertex of the second
row ofD‡] given by a copy of theidentity functor;f o re a c h⋎∈L, let us write
[γ0
⋎] for the path on⃗ΓD∗ of length 0 at ⋎ and [γ1
⋎] for the path on⃗ΓD∗ of length

88 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
2 that starts from⋎,d e s c e n d sv i aπ⋎ to the core vertex, and returns to⋎ via the
telecore edgeδ⋎. Then the collection of natural transformations
{θ□⋎,θ−1
□⋎,θ⋎,θ−1
⋎ }⋎∈L
— where we writeθ□⋎ for the identity natural transformation from the arrowδ□ :
X→X to the composite arrowpr⋎ ◦δ⋎ :X→X and
θ⋎ :D∗
[γ1
⋎]
∼
→D∗
[γ0
⋎]
for the isomorphism arising fromθX — generate a family of homotopies Hδ
on D∗ [hence, in particular, by restriction, acontact structure on the telecore
Tδ]. Finally, D∗= D∗
≤4 admits a natural structure ofcore on D∗
≤3 in a fashion
compatible with the core structure ofD†
≤4 on D†
≤3 discussed in (i) [that is to say,
loosely speaking,E “forms a core” of the functors inD∗].
(iii) Write
ιlog,⋎ : λ× ◦pr⋎ ◦logX →λ×pf ◦pr⋎+1,ι ×
def
= ι× : λ× →λ×pf
for the natural transformations determined by the natural transformations of Corol-
lary 3.6, (iii). Then these natural transformationsιlog,⋎, ι× belong to afamily of
homotopies on D†
≤3 that determines onD†
≤3 a structure ofobservable S†
log on
D†
≤2 and, moreover, iscompatible with the families of homotopies that constitute
the core and telecore structures of (i), (ii).
(iv) The diagram of categoriesD†
≤2 does not admit a structure of core on
D†
≤1 which [i.e., whose constituent family of homotopies] iscompatible with [the
constituent family of homotopies of] theobservable S†
log of (iii). Moreover, the
telecore structure Tδ of (ii), the family of homotopies Hδ of (ii), and the
observable S†
log of (iii) arenot simultaneously compatible.
(v) The vertex□ of the second row ofD∗is anexus of ⃗ΓD∗. Moreover,D∗is
totally □-rigid, and thenatural actionof Z on the inﬁnite linear oriented graph
⃗ΓD†
≤1
extends to an action ofZ onD∗by nexus-classes of self-equivalencesof
D∗. Finally, the self-equivalences in these nexus-classes arecompatible with Hδ
[cf. (ii)], as well as with thefamilies of homotopies that constitute thecores,
telecore,a n dobservable of (i), (ii), (iii).
Proof. The proofs of the various assertions of the present Corollary 3.7 areentirely
similar to the proofs of the corresponding assertions of Corollary 3.6.⃝
Remark 3.7.1. In some sense, the purpose of Corollary 3.7 is to examine what
happens if the mono-anabelian theory of §1 is not available, i.e., if one is in a
situation in which one may only apply thebi-anabelian version of this theory. This
is the main reason for our assumption that “T = TF” in Corollary 3.7 — that is

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 89
to say, whenT = TM, one is obliged to apply Proposition 3.2, (v), a result whose
proof requires one to invoke themono-anabelian theory of§1.
Remark 3.7.2. The “Frobenius-theoretic”point of view of Remarks 3.6.2, 3.6.5,
3.6.6 motivates the following observation:
The situation under consideration in Corollaries 3.6, 3.7 isstructurally
reminiscent of the situation encountered in thep-adic crystalline theory,
for instance, when one considers theMF∇-objects of [Falt].
That is to say, thecore E plays the role of the “absolute constants”,g i v e n ,f o r
instance, in the p-adic theory by [absolutely] unramiﬁed extensions of Zp.T h e
isomorphism
θbi :p rbi
1
∼
→prbi
2
[cf. Corollary 3.7, (ii)] between thetwo projection functorsprbi
1 , prbi
2 :X×EX→X
isformally reminiscentof the notion of a(n) [integrable]connectionin the crystalline
theory. Thediagonal functor
δX :X→X× E X
[cf. Corollary 3.7, (ii)] isformally reminiscentof the diagonal embedding into the
divided power envelope of the product of a scheme with itself in the crystalline
theory. Moreover, since, in the crystalline theory, this divided power envelope may
itself be regarded as acrystal, the [various divided powers of the ideal deﬁning the]
diagonal embedding may then be regarded as a sort ofHodge ﬁltrationon this crys-
tal. That is to say, thetelecorestructure of Corollary 3.7, (ii), may be regarded as
corresponding to theHodge ﬁltration, or, for instance, in the context of the theory
of indigenous bundles [cf., e.g., [Mzk1], [Mzk4]], to theHodge section.T h u s ,f r o m
this point of view, the secondincompatibility of assertion (iv) of Corollaries 3.6,
3.7, is reminiscent of the fact that [in general] theFrobenius actionon the crystal
underlying anMF
∇-object fails to preserve theHodge ﬁltration. For instance, in
the case of indigenous bundles, this failure to preserve the Hodge section may be
regarded as a consequence of theisomorphicity of the Kodaira-Spencer morphism
associated to the Hodge section. On the other hand, thelog-Frobenius-compatibility
of themono-anabelian modelsdiscussed in Corollary 3.6 may be regarded as corre-
sponding tocanonical Frobenius actionson the crystals constituted by the divided
power envelopes discussed above — cf. theuniformizingMF∇-objectsconstructed
in [Mzk1], [Mzk4]. Moreover, thecompatibility of the coricity ofE, Anab with the
telecoreand contactstructures of Corollary 3.6, (ii), on the one hand, and the“log-
Frobenius observable”Slog of Corollary 3.6, (iii), on the other hand, is reminiscent
of the construction of theGalois representationassociated to anMF∇-object by
considering the submodule that lies in the 0-th step of theHodge ﬁltration and,
moreover, isﬁxed by the action of Frobenius[cf. Remark 3.7.3, (ii), below]. Thus,
in summary, we have the following “dictionary”:
the coricity of E← →absolutely unramiﬁed constants
bi-anabelian isomorphism of projection functors←→integrable connections
diagonal functorδX telecore str. ←→Hodge ﬁltration/section

90 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
bi-anabelian log-incompatibility ←→Kodaira-Spencer isomorphism
“forgetful” functorφAn telecore str. ←→underlying vector bundleof MF∇-object
mono-anabelian log-compatibility ←→[positive slope!] uniformizing MF∇-objects
[where “str.” stands for “structure”]. This analogy withMF∇-objects will be
developed further in§5b e l o w .
Remark 3.7.3. The signiﬁcance of Corollary 3.7 in the context of our discussion
of themono-anabelian versus thebi-anabelian approach to anabelian geometry [cf.
Remark 1.9.8] may be understood as follows.
(i) We begin by considering the conditions that we wish to impose on the
framework in which we are to work. First of all, we wish to have some sort of
ﬁxed reference modelof “X”. The fact that this model is to beﬁxed throughout
the discussion then translates into the requirement that this copy ofX be a core,
relative to the various“operations”performed during the discussion. On the other
hand, one does not wish for this model to remain “completely unrelated to the
operations of interest”, but rather that it may berelated,o rcompared, to the various
copies of this modelthat appear as one executes the operations of interest. In our
situation, we wish to be able to relate the “ﬁxed reference model” to thecopies
of this model— i.e., “log-subject copies”—t h a ta r esubject to the log-Frobenius
operation [i.e., functor — cf. Remark 3.6.7]. Moreover, since the log-Frobenius
functor is isomorphic to the identity functor [cf. Proposition 3.2, (v)], hence may
only be “properly understood” in the context of the natural transformations “ι×”
and “ιlog”, we wish for everything that we do to becompatiblewith the operation
of “making an observation”via these natural transformations. Thus, in summary,
the main conditionsthat we wish to impose on the framework in which we are to
work are the following:
(a) coricity of the model;
(b) comparabilityof the model tolog-subject copiesof the model;
(c) consistent observability of the various operations executed [especially
log].
In the context of the various assertions of Corollaries 3.6, 3.7, these three aspects
correspond as follows:
(a) ←→the coricity of (i), the “coricity portion” of the telecore structure of (ii),
(b) ←→the telecoreand contact structures/families of homotopies of (ii),
(c) ←→the “log-observable”of (iii).
[Here, we refer to the content of Deﬁnition 3.5, (iv), (b), as the “coricity portion”
of a telecore structure.] In the case of Corollary 3.7, the“ﬁxed reference model”is
realized by applying a“category-theoretic base-change”(−)×E X, as in Corollary
3.7, i.e., thecopyof“X”usedtoeﬀectthisbase-changeservesasthe“ﬁxedreference
model”; in the case of Corollary 3.6, the“ﬁxed reference model”is given by “Anab”
[i.e., especially, thesecondpiece of parenthesized data “(−,−)” in the deﬁnition of
Anab — cf. Deﬁnition 3.1, (vi)]. Also, we observe that thesecond incompatibilityof

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 91
assertion (iv) of Corollaries 3.6, 3.7 asserts, in eﬀect, thatneither of the approaches
of these two corollaries succeeds insimultaneously realizingconditions (a), (b), (c),
in thestrict sense.
(ii) Let us take a closer look at themono-anabelian approach of Corollary
3.6 from the point of view of the discussion of (i). From the point of view of
“operations performed”, this approach may be summarized as follows: One starts
with “Π”, applies themono-anabelian algorithms of Corollary 1.10 to obtain an
object of Anab,t h e nforgets the “group-theoretic origins”of such objects to obtain
an object ofX [cf. thetelecore structureof Corollary 3.6, (ii)], which issubjectto the
action of log;t h i sa c t i o no flog obliterates the ring structure[indeed, it obliterates
both the additive and multiplicative structures!] of the arithmetic data involved,
hence leaving behind, as aninvariant of log, only the original “Π”, to which one
may again apply themono-anabelian algorithms of Corollary 1.10.
Π ⇝
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
Π
↷
k
×
An
⎞
⎟⎟⎠ ⇝
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
Π
↷
k
×
⋎ ↶ log
⎞
⎟⎟⎠ ⇝ Π ⇝
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
Π
↷
k
×
An
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
The point of the mono-anabelian approach is that althoughlog obliterates the ring
structures involved [cf. the second incompatibility of Corollary 3.6, (iv)],E — i.e.,
“Π” — remainsconstant [up to isomorphism] throughout the application of the
various operations; this implies that the“purely group-theoretic constructions”of
Corollary 1.10 — i.e.,Anab, κAn — also remainconstantthroughout the application
of the various operations. In particular, in the above diagram, despite the fact
that log obliterates the ring structure of “k
×
⋎”, the operations executed induce an
isomorphism between all the “Π’s” that appear, hence anisomorphism between the
initial and ﬁnal “(Π↷ k
×
An)’s”. At a more technical level, this state of aﬀairs may
be witnessed in the fact that although [cf. the proof of the second incompatibility
of Corollary 3.6, (iv)] there existincompatible composites of homotopiesinvolving
the families of homotopies that constitute the telecore, contact, and observable
structures involved, these compositesbecome compatibleas soon as one augments
the various paths involved with a path back down to thecore vertex“Anab”. At a
more philosophical level:
This state of aﬀairs, in which the application oflog does not immediately
yield an isomorphism of “k
×
’s”, but does after“pealing oﬀ the operation
of forgetting the group-theoretic construction ofk
×
An”, is reminiscent of the
situation discussed in Remark 3.6.6, (ii), concerning
“Frobenius ↷ pn· (an isomorphism)”
[i.e., where Frobenius induces an isomorphism after“pealing oﬀ”an ap-
propriate power ofp].
(iii) By contrast, thebi-anabelianapproach of Corollary 3.7 may be understood
in the context of the present discussion as follows: One starts with anarbitrarily

92 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
declared “model”copy “Π↷ k
×
model”o fX,t h e nforgets the fact that this copy was
arbitrarily declared a model [cf. thetelecore structureof Corollary 3.7, (ii)]; this
yields a copy “Π↷ k
×
⋎”o fX on whichlog acts in a fashion thatobliterates the ring
structure of the arithmetic data involved, hence leaving behind, as aninvariant of
log, only the original “Π”.
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
Π
↷
k
×
model
⎞
⎟⎟⎠ ⇝
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
Π
↷
k
×
⋎ ↶ log
⎞
⎟⎟⎠ ⇝ Π
Thus, unlike the case with the mono-anabelian approach, if one tries to work with
another model “Π↷ k
×
model”after applying log, then the “k
×
model” portion of this
new modelcannot be related to the “k
×
model” portion of theoriginal modelin a con-
sistent fashion — i.e., such a relation isobstructedby log,w h i c hobliteratesthe ring
structure ofk
×
model. Moreover, unlike the case with the mono-anabelian approach,
there is “no escape route”in the bi-anabelian approach [i.e., which requires the
use ofmodels] from this situation given by taking a path back down to some core
vertex [i.e., such as “Anab”]. Relative to the analogy with usual Frobenius actions
[cf. Remark 3.6.6, (ii)], this situation is reminiscent of the Frobenius action on the
ideal deﬁning the diagonalof a divided power envelope
I⊆O
S
PD
× S
[where S i s ,s a y ,s m o o t ho v e rFp] — i.e., Frobenius simply mapsI t o0i naf a s h i o n
that does not allow one to“recover, in an isomorphic fashion, by pealing oﬀ a power
of p”. [Indeed, the data necessary to“peal oﬀ a power ofp”consists, in essence, of
a Frobenius lifting— which is, in essence, equivalent to the datum of auniformizing
MF∇-object — cf. Remark 3.7.2; the theory of [Mzk1], [Mzk4].] In particular:
Although it is diﬃcult to give a completely rigorous formulation of the
question “bi-anabelian
?
=⇒mono-anabelian” raised in Remark 1.9.8, the
state of aﬀairs discussed above strongly suggests anegative answerto this
question.
(iv) The following questions constitute a usefulguide to understanding better
the gap that lies between the“success of the mono-anabelian approach”and the
“failure of the bi-anabelian approach”, as documented in (i), (ii), (iii):
(a) In what capacity — i.e., as whattype of mathematical object [cf. Re-
mark 3.6.7] — does onetransport— i.e., “eﬀect thecoricity of” [cf. con-
dition (a) of (i)] — the ﬁxed reference model of “k
×
”d o w nt o“future
log-generations”[i.e., smaller elements ofL]?
(b) On precisely what type of data [cf. Remark 3.6.7] does thecomparison
[cf. condition (b) of (i)] via telecore/contact structures depend?
That is to say, in themono-anabelian approach, the answer to both questions is
given byE [i.e., “Π”],Anab; by contrast, in thebi-anabelian approach, the answer

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 93
to (b) necessarilyrequires the inclusion of the “modelk
×
model”— a requirement that
is incompatible with the coricityrequired by (a) [i.e., sincelog obliterates the ring
structure ofk
×
model].
(Galois [core])
⧸⧹
(Galois [of model])
( Galois +log-subject
arithmetic data
)
Fig. 1: Mono-anabelian comparison only requires“Galois input data”.
(Galois [core])
⧸⧹( Galois +model
arithmetic data
)
...
?
∼
→ ...
( Galois +log-subject
arithmetic data
)
Fig. 2: Bi-anabelian comparison requires“arithmetic input data”.
One waytounderstand this state of aﬀairs is as follows. If one attempts toconstruct
a “bi-anabelian version ofAnab”, then the requirement ofcoricity means that the
“model k
×
model”e m p l o y e di nt h ebi-anabelian reconstruction algorithmof such a
“bi-anabelian version ofAnab”m u s tb ecompatiblewith the various isomorphisms
k
×
model
∼
→k
×
⋎ of Remark 3.6.1, (i) — where we recall that the various distinct
k
×
⋎’s are related to one another bylog — i.e., compatible with the“building”, or
“ediﬁce”, ofk
×
⋎’s constituted by these isomorphisms together with the diagram
of Remark 3.6.1, (i). That is to say, in order for the required coricity to hold,
this bi-anabelian reconstruction algorithm must be such that itonly depends on
the ring structure ofk
×
model “up to log”— i.e., the algorithm must beimmune to
the confusion [arising from log] of the additive and multiplicative structures that
constitute this ring structure. On the other hand, the bi-anabelian approach to
reconstruction clearly does not satisfy this property[i.e., it requires that the ring
structure ofk
×
model be left intact].
Remark 3.7.4. In the context of the issue ofdistinguishing between the mono-
anabelian and bi-anabelian approaches to anabelian geometry [cf. Remark 3.7.3],
one question that is often posed is the following:
Why can’t one somehowsneak a “ﬁxed refence model” into a “mono-
anabelian reconstruction algorithm” by ﬁnding, for instance,
some copyof Q or Qp
inside the Galois group “Π” and then building up some copy of the hyper-
bolic orbicurve under consideration over this base ﬁeld [i.e., this copy ofQ,

94 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Qp], which one then takes as one’s “model”, thus allowing one to“reduce”
mono-anabelian problems to bi-anabelian ones[cf. Remark 1.9.8]?
One important observation, relative to this question, is that although it is not so
diﬃcult to “construct” such copies ofQ or Qp from Π, it is substantially more
diﬃcult to
construct copies of thealgebraic closuresof Q or Qp in such a way that
the resulting absolute Galois groups are isomorphic to the appropriate
quotient of the given Galois group “Π” in afunctorial fashion [cf. Remark
3.7.5 below].
Moreover, once one constructs, for instance, a universal pro-ﬁnite ´etale covering
of an appropriate hyperbolic orbicurve on which Π acts [in a “natural”, functorial
fashion], one must specify [cf. question (a) of Remark 3.7.3, (iv)] in what capacity
— i.e., as what type of mathematical object — one transports [i.e., “eﬀects the
coricity of”] this pro-hyperbolic orbicurve model down to“future log-generations”.
Then if one only takes anaive approach to these issues, one is ultimately led to the
arbitrary introduction of“models”that fail to be immune to the application of the
log-Frobenius functor— that is to say, one ﬁnds oneself, in eﬀect, in the situation of
the “bi-anabelian approach” discussed in Remark 3.7.3. Thus, the above discussion
may be summarized in ﬂowchart form, as follows:
construction of model [universal pro-covering] schemeswithout essential use of Π
⇓
natural functorial actionof Π on model scheme istrivial
⇓
must supplement model scheme with Π
∼
→Gal(model scheme)
⇓
essentially equivalent situation to“bi-anabelian approach”.
Put another way, if one tries to sneak a “ﬁxed refence model” that may be con-
structed without essential use of “Π” into a “mono-anabelian reconstruction algo-
rithm”, then one ﬁnds oneself confronted with the followingtwo mutually exclusive
choices concerning the type of mathematical object [cf. question (a) of Remark
3.7.3, (iv)] that one is to assign to this model:
(∗) the model arises from “Π” =⇒ “functorially trivial model”;
(∗∗) the model does not arisefrom “Π” =⇒ “bi-anabelian approach”.
In particular, Figures 1 and 2 of Remark 3.7.3, (iv), arenot [at least in an “a priori
sense”]“essentially equivalent”.
Remark 3.7.5.
(i) From the point of view of“constructing models of the base ﬁeld fromΠ”
[cf. the discussion of Remark 3.7.4], one natural approach to the issue of ﬁnding

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 95
“Galois-compatible models”is to work withKummer classes of scheme-theoretic
functions, since Kummer classes aretautologically compatible with Galois actions.
[Indeed, the use of Kummer classes is one important aspect of the theory of§1.]
Moreover, in addition to being “tautologically Galois-compatible”, Kummer classes
also have the virtue of ﬁtting into acontainer
H(Π)
def
= H1(Π, μ ˆZ(Π))
[cf. Corollary 1.10, (d), where we take “ΠX”t ob eΠ ]w h i c hinherits the coricity
of Π [cf. question (a) of Remark 3.7.3, (iv)] in a very natural, tautological fashion.
Thus, once one characterizes, in a “group-theoretic” fashion, the“Kummer subset”
of thiscontainerH(Π) [i.e., the subset constituted by the Kummer classes that arise
from scheme-theoretic functions], it remains to reconstruct theadditive structure
on [the union with{0} of] the set of Kummer classes [cf. the theory of§1]. If one
takes the point of view of the question posed in Remark 3.7.4, then it is tempting
to try to use “models”solely as a means to reconstruct this additive structure.
This approach, which combines the“purely group-theoretic”[i.e., “mono-
anabelian”]container H(Π) with theindirect use of “models” to recon-
struct the additive structure [or the Kummer subset], may be thought of
as a sort ofintermediate alternative between the “mono-anabelian” and
“bi-anabelian” approaches discussed so far; in the discussion to follow,
we shall refer to this sort of intermediate approach as“pseudo-mono-
anabelian”.
With regard to implementing this pseudo-mono-anabelian approach, we observe
that the“automorphism version of the Grothendieck Conjecture”[i.e., thefuncto-
riality of the algorithms of Corollary 1.10, applied toautomorphisms] allows one
to conclude that the additive structure “pulled back from a model scheme via the
Kummer map” isrigid [i.e., remains unaﬀected by automorphisms of Π]. On the
other hand, the “isomorphism version of the Grothendieck Conjecture”[i.e., the
functoriality of the algorithms of Corollary 1.10, applied toisomorphisms —c f .
the isomorphismθbi of Corollary 3.7, (ii)] allows one to conclude that this additive
structure isindependent of the choice of model.
(ii) The pseudo-mono-anabelian approach gives rise to a theory that satisﬁes
many of the useful properties satisﬁed by the mono-anabelian theory. Thus, at ﬁrst
glance, it is tempting to consider simplyabandoning the mono-anabelian approach,
in favor of the pseudo-mono-anabelian approach. Closer inspection reveals, how-
ever, that the situation is not so simple. Indeed, relative to thecoricityrequirement
of Remark 3.7.3, (i), (a), there is no problem with allowing the“hidden models”on
which the pseudo-mono-anabelian approach depends in an essential way toremain
hidden. On the other hand, the issue ofrelating [cf. Remark 3.7.3, (i), (b)] these
hidden models tolog-subject copiesof these models is more complicated. Here, the
central problemmay be summarized as follows [cf. Remark 3.7.3, (iv), (a), (b)]:
Problem (∗type): Find atypeof mathematical object that [in the context
of the framework discussed in Remark 3.7.3, (i)] serves as acommon type
of mathematical object for both “coric models” and “log-subject copies”,

96 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
thus rendering possible thecomparisonof “coric models” and “log-subject
copies”.
That is to say, in themono-anabelian approach, this “common type” is furnished
by the objects that constituteE and [in light of the“group-theoreticity”of the algo-
rithms of Corollary 1.10]Anab;i nt h ebi-anabelianapproach, the “common object”
is furnished by the“copy ofX that appears in the base-change(−)×E X”. Note
that it is precisely the existence of this “common type of mathematical object” that
renders possible the deﬁnition of thetelecore structure— cf., especially, the functor
δ
X of Corollary 3.7, (ii). In particular, we note that the deﬁnition of thediagonal
functor δX is possiblepreciselybecause of theequalityof the types of mathematical
object involved in the two factors ofX× E X. On the other hand, if, in imple-
menting thepseudo-mono-anabelianapproach, one tries to use, for instance,E [i.e.,
without including the“hidden model”!], then although this yields a framework in
w h i c hi ti sp o s s i b l et ow o r kw i t ht h e“mono-anabelian containerH(Π)”,t h i sd o e s
not allow one to describe thecontents [i.e., the Kummer subset with its ring struc-
ture] of this container. That is to say, if one describes these “contents” via“hidden
models”, then the data contained in the “common type” isnot suﬃcientfor the
operation ofrelating this description to the“conventional description of contents”
that one wishes to apply to thelog-subject copies. Indeed, if the coric models and
log-subject copies only share the containerH(Π), butnot the description of its
contents — i.e., the description for the coric models is some“mysterious descrip-
tion involving hidden models”, while the description for the log-subject copies is the
“standard Kummer map description”— then,a priori,t h e r ei sno reasonthat these
two descriptions shouldcoincide. For instance, if the “mysterious description” is
not related to the “standard description” via somecommon descriptionapplied to
a common typeof mathematical object, then,a priori,t h e“mysterious description”
could be [among a vast variety of possibilities] one of the following:
(1) Instead of embedding the [nonzero elements of the]base ﬁeldintoH(Π)
via the usual Kummer map, one could consider the embedding obtained
by composing the usual Kummer map with the automorphism induced by
some automorphism of the quotient Π↠ Gk [cf. the notation of Corollary
1.10, where we take “ΠX”t ob eΠ ]w h i c hi snot of scheme-theoretic origin
[cf., e.g., [NSW], the Closing Remark preceding Theorem 12.2.7].
(2) Alternatively, instead of embedding thefunction ﬁeldof the curve under
consideration intoH(Π) via the usual Kummer map, one could consider
the embedding obtained by composing the usual Kummer map with the
automorphism ofH(Π) given bymuliplication by some element∈ˆZ×.
Thus, in order to ensure that such pathologies do not arise, it appears that there
is little choice but toinclude the ring/scheme-theoretic modelsin thecommon type
that one adopts as a“solution to (∗type)”, so that one may apply the“standard
Kummer map description”in asimultaneous, consistentfashion to both the coric
data and the log-subject data. But [since these models are“functorially obstructed
from being subsumed intoΠ”—cf. Remark3.7.4]theinclusionofsuchring/scheme-
theoretic models amounts precisely to the “bi-anabelian approach”discussed in
Remark 3.7.3 [cf., especially, Figure 2 of Remark 3.7.3, (iv)].

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 97
(iii) From a“physical”point of view, it is natural to think of data that sat-
isﬁes some sort ofcoricity — such as the´etale fundamental group Π — as being
“massless”, like light. By comparison, the arithmetic data “k
×
”—o nw h i c ht h e
log-Frobenius functoracts non-isomorphically — may be thought of as being like
matter which has “weight”. This dichotomy is reminiscent of the dichotomy dis-
cussed in the Introduction to [Mzk16] between“´etale-like”and “Frobenius-like”
structures. Thus, in summary:
coricity, “´etale-like”structures ←→massless, likelight
“Frobenius-like”structures ←→matter of positive mass.
From this point of view, the discussion of (i), (ii) may be summarized as follows:
Even if the container H(Π) ismassless, it one tries to use it to carry“cargo of
substantial weight”, then the resulting package [of container plus cargo] isno longer
massless. On the other hand, the very existence ofmono-anabelian algorithmsas
discussed in §1, §2 corresponds, in this analogy, to the“conversion of light into
matter”[cf. the point of view of Remark 1.9.7]!
(iv)RelativetothedichotomydiscussedintheIntroductionto[Mzk16]between
“´etale-like” and “Frobenius-like” structures, the problem observed in the present
paper with the bi-anabelian approach may be thought of as an example of the
phenomenonofthe non-applicability of Galois [i.e., “´etale-like”] descent with respect
to “Frobenius-like” morphisms[i.e., the existence of descent data for a “Frobenius-
like” morphism which cannot be descended to an object on the codomain of the
morphism]. In classical arithmetic geometry, this phenomenon may be seen, for
instance, in the non-descendability of Galois-invariant coherent ideals with respect
to morphisms such as Spec(k[t]) →Spec(k[tn]) [where n ≥2 is an integer;k is a
ﬁeld], or [cf. the discussion of “X× E X” in Remark 3.7.2] the diﬀerence between
an integrable connectionand an integrable connection equipped with a compatible
Frobenius action[e.g., of the sort that arises from anMF∇-object].
Remark 3.7.6. With regard to thepseudo-mono-anabelian approach discussed
in Remark 3.7.5, one may make the following further observations.
(i) In order to carry out thepseudo-mono-anabelian approach [or, a fortiori,
the mono-anabelian approach], it is necessary to use the full
proﬁnite ´etale fundamental group
of a hyperbolic orbicurve, say, of strictly Belyi type. That is to say, if, for instance,
one attempts to use the geometrically pro-Σ fundamental group of a hyperbolic
curve [i.e., where Σ is a set of primes which is not equal to the set of all primes],
then the crucial injectivity of the Kummer map[cf. Proposition 1.6, (i)] fails to
hold. In particular, this failure of injectivity means that one cannot work with the
crucial additive structureon [the union with{0} of] the image of the Kummer map.
(ii) In a similar vein, if one attempts to work, for instance, with theabsolute
Galois group of a number ﬁeld— i.e., in theabsence of any geometric fundamental
group of a hyperbolic orbicurve over the number ﬁeld — then, in order to work
with Kummer classes, one must contend with the nontrivial issue ofﬁnding an
appropriate [proﬁnite] cyclotome[i.e., copy of “ˆZ(1)”] to replace the “curve-based
cyclotome MX” of Proposition 1.4, (ii) [cf. also Remark 1.9.5].

98 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(iii) Next, we observe that if one attempts toconstruct “models of the base
ﬁeld”via the theory of “characters of qLT-type”as in [Mzk20], §3[ c f . a l s ot h e
theory of [Mzk2],§4], then although [just as was the case withKummer classes]
such “qLT-models of the base ﬁeld” aretautologically Galois-compatibleand admit
a coricity inherited from the coricity ofΠ, [unlike the case withKummer classes]
the essential use ofp-adic Hodge theoryimplies that the resulting“construction of
t h eb a s eﬁ e l d ”[cf. the discussion of Remark 1.9.5] is
incompatiblewith the operation of passing fromglobal[e.g., number] ﬁelds
to localﬁelds
[i.e., does not admit an analogue of the ﬁrst portion of Corollary 1.10, (h)], hence
also incompatiblewith the operation ofrelating the resulting “constructions of the
base ﬁeld”atdiﬀerent localizationsof a number ﬁeld. Such localization [i.e., in the
terminology of§5, “panalocalization”] properties will play akey rolein the theory
of §5b e l o w .
(iv) In the context of (iii), it is interesting to note thatgeometrically pro-Σ
fundamental groups as in (i) alsofail to be compatible with localization. Indeed,
even if some sort of pro-Σ analogue of the theory of§1 is, in the future, obtained
for the primes lying over prime numbers∈Σ, such an analogue isimpossible at the
primes lying over prime numbers̸∈Σ [since, as is easily veriﬁed, at such primes, the
automorphisms ofGk [notation of Corollary 1.10] that arenot of scheme-theoretic
origin may extend, in general, to automorphisms of thefull arithmetic [geometri-
cally pro-Σ]fundamental group].
(v) At the time of writing, it appears to be rather diﬃcult to give amono-
anabelian “group-theoretic” algorithmas in Theorem 1.9 in the case of num-
ber ﬁelds by somehow “gluing together” [mono-anabelian, “group-theoretic”] al-
gorithms [cf. the approach via p-adic Hodge theory discussed in (iii)] applied at
nonarchimedean completionsof the number ﬁeld. That is to say, if one tries, for
instance, to construct anumber ﬁeld F as a subset of the product of copies ofF
constructed at various nonarchimedean completions ofF, then it appears to be
a highly nontrivial issue to reconstruct the correspondences between the various
“local copies” ofF. Indeed, if one attempts to work withabelianizations of local
and global Galois groups and applyclass ﬁeld theory[i.e., in the fashion of [Uchi],
i nt h ec a s eo ffunction ﬁelds], then one may only recover the “global copy” ofF×
embedded in the id`eles up to an indeterminacy that involves, in particular, various
“solenoids”[cf., e.g., [ArTt], Chapter Nine, Theorem 3]. On the other hand, if one
attempts to work with local and globalKummer classes, then one must contend
with the phenomenon that it is not clear how tolift local Kummer classes to global
Kummer classes; that is to say, the indeterminacies that occur for such liftings
are of a nature roughly reminiscent of the global Kummer classes whose vanishing
is implied by the so-calledLeopoldt Conjecture[i.e., in its formulation concerning
p-adic localizations of units of a number ﬁeld], which is unknown in general at the
time of writing.
Remark 3.7.7.
(i) One way to interpret the fact that the log-Frobenius operationlog is not a
ring homomorphism[cf. the discussion of Remarks 3.7.3, 3.7.4, 3.7.5] is to think of

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 99
“log” as constituting a sort of“wall”that separates thetwo “distinct scheme
theories”that occurbeforeandafteritsapplication. The´etalefundamentalgroups
that arise in these “distinct scheme theories” thus necessarily correspond todis-
tinct, unrelated basepoints.T h u s ,i f ,f o ri =1 ,2, Gi
out
↷ Δi is a copy of the
outer Galois action on the geometric fundamental group “Gk
out
↷ ΔX”o fT h e o -
rem 1.9 that arises in one of these two “distinct scheme theories” separated by the
“log-wall”, then although thislog-wall cannot be penetrated by ring structures[i.e.,
by “scheme theory”], itcan be penetratedby theabstract proﬁnite group structure
of the Gi —c f . t h eGalois-equivariance of the map “logk” of Deﬁnition 3.1, (i).
Moreover, since the “abstract outer action pair” [i.e., an abstract proﬁnite group
equipped with an outer action by another abstract proﬁnite group]G2
out
↷ Δ2 is
clearly isomorphic to the composite abstract outer action pairG1
∼
→G2
out
↷ Δ2 [as
well as, by deﬁnition, the abstract outer action pairG1
out
↷ Δ1 ] — i.e.,
(
G1
out
↷ Δ1
) ∼
→
(
G1
∼
→G2
out
↷ Δ2
) ∼
→
(
G2
out
↷ Δ2
)
— we thus conclude that thelog-wall can be penetrated by the isomorphism class
of the abstract outer action pairGi
out
↷ Δi.
G1
∼
→
out
↷
Δ1
log
log
log
∼
→ G2
out
↷
Δ2
(ii) Once one has made the observations made in (i), it is natural to proceed to
consider what sort of“additional data”may beshared on both sidesof thelog-wall.
Typically, “purely group-theoretic structures” constructed from “Gi
out
↷ Δi” serve
as natural containersfor such additional data [cf., e.g., the discussion of Remark
3.7.5]. Thus, the additional data may be thought as some sort of achoice [cf. the
dotted arrows in the diagram below] amongvarious possibilities[cf. the “⃝’s” in
the diagram below] housed in such a group-theoretic container.
/axisshort/axisshort/arrowaxisright⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
log
log
log
log
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝ /arrowaxisleft/axisshort/axisshort
⃝
From this point of view:

100 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
The fundamental diﬀerence that distinguishes thepseudo-mono-anabelian
approach discussed in Remark 3.7.5 from themono-anabelian approach is
the issue of whether this “choice” is speciﬁed in terms thatdepend on
t h es c h e m et h e o r ythat gives rise to the choice [i.e., the pseudo-mono-
anabelian case] or not [i.e., the mono-anabelian case, in which the choice
may be speciﬁed in language that depends only on theabstract group
structure of, say, “Gi
out
↷ Δi”].
In fact, the discussion in Remark 3.7.5, (ii) [cf. also Figs. 1, 2 of Remark 3.7.3,
(iv)], may be depicted via a similar illustration to the above illustration of the “log-
wall” in which the “log-wall” is replaced by a“model-wall”separating “reference
models”from “log-subject copies”of such models. In Remark 3.7.5, (ii), special
attention was given to the situation in which the “additional data” consists of
the “additive structure”on the image of the Kummer map. When the Δi’s of (i)
are given by thebirational geometric fundamental groups“ΔηX ” of Theorem 1.11,
another example of such “additional data” in whichthe speciﬁcation of the “choice”
depends on “scheme theory”[and hence cannot, at leasta priori, be shared on both
sides of thelog-wall] is given by thespeciﬁcation of some ﬁnite collection of closed
points corresponding to the cusps of someaﬃne hyperbolic curvethat lies insome
given scheme theory[cf. Remark 1.11.5].
(iii) With regard to the issue of “specifying some ﬁnite collection of closed
points corresponding to the cusps of an aﬃne hyperbolic curve” discussed in the
ﬁnal portion of (ii), we note that in certainspecial cases, a “purely group-theoretic”
speciﬁcation is in fact possible. For instance, if, in the notation of Theorem 1.11,
X is ahyperelliptic curve whoseunique nontrivial k-automorphism is given by its
hyperelliptic involution, then theset of points ﬁxed by the hyperelliptic involution
constitutes such an example in which a “purely group-theoretic” speciﬁcation can
be made by considering the conjugacy classes of inertia groups “Ix”ﬁ x e db yt h e
unique nontrivial outer automorphism of ΔηX that commutes with the given outer
action ofGk on ΔηX .
(iv) The “log-wall” discussed in (i) is reminiscent of theconstant indeterminacy
arising frommorphisms of Frobenius type[i.e., which thus constitute a “wall” that
cannot be penetrated byconstant rigidity] in the theory of the´etale theta function
[cf. [Mzk18], Corollary 5.12 and the following remarks], as well as of the subtleties
that arise from theFrobenius morphismin the context ofanabelian geometry in
positive characteristic[cf., e.g., [Stix]].
Remark 3.7.8.
Many of the arguments in the various remarks following Corollaries 3.6, 3.7
are not formulated entirely rigorously. Thus, in the future, it is quite possible that
certain of the obstacles pointed out in these remarks can be overcome. Nevertheless,
we presented these remarks in the hope that they could aid in elucidating the
content of and motivation [from the point of view of the author] behind the various
rigorously formulated results of the present paper.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 101
Section 4: Archimedean Log-Frobenius Compatibility
In the present§4, we present anarchimedeanversion [cf. Corollary 4.5] of the
theory of§3, i.e., we interpret the theory of§2 in terms of a certaincompatibility
with the“log-Frobenius functor”.
Deﬁnition 4.1.
(i) Letk be aCAF [cf. §0]. WriteOk ⊆k for thesubset of elements of absolute
value≤1,O×
k ⊆Ok for thesubgroup of units[i.e., elements of absolute value equal
to 1 — cf. [Mzk17], Deﬁnition 3.1, (ii)],O⊿
k ⊆Ok for themultiplicative monoid of
nonzero elements,a n dk∼ ↠ k× def
= k\{0} for theuniversal coveringof k×.T h u s ,
k∼ ↠ k× isuniquelydetermined, uptounique isomorphism,a sapointedtopological
space and, moreover, [as is well-known] may be constructedexplicitly by considering
homotopy classes of pathsonk×; moreover, the pointed topological spacek∼ admits
a natural topological group structure, determined by the topological group structure
of k×. Note that the “inverse” of theexponential map k→k× [given by the usual
power series] determines anisomorphism of topological groups
logk : k∼ ∼
→k
— which we shall refer to as thelogarithm associated tok.N e x t ,l e t
Xell
be anelliptically admissible Aut-holomorphic orbispace[cf. Deﬁnition 2.1, (i); Re-
mark 2.1.1]. We shall refer to as a[k-]Kummer structureon Xell any isomorphism
of topological ﬁelds
κk : k
∼
→AXell
def
= AXell
⋃
{0}
—w h e r ew ew r i t eAXell for the “Ap” of Corollary 2.7, (e) [equipped with various
topological and algebraic structures], which may beidentiﬁed [hence considered as
an object that isindependent of “p”] via the various isomorphisms “Ap
∼
→Ap′”
of Corollary 2.7, (e), together with thefunctoriality of the algorithms of Corollary
2.7. Note that k, k×, k∼,a n dAXell are equipped with natural Aut-holomorphic
structures, with respect to whichκk determines co-holomorphicizations between k
andAXell, as well as betweenk∼ andAXell; moreover, these co-holomorphicizations
are compatiblewith logk.N e x t ,l e t
T∈{TF,TCG,TLG,TM,TH,TH⊞}
—w h e r eTF, TCG, TLG, TM as in Deﬁnition 3.1, (i), and we write
TH
for the category ofconnectedAut-holomorphic orbispacesand morphisms of Aut-
holomorphic orbispaces [cf. Remark 2.1.1], and
TH⊞

102 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
for the category ofconnectedAut-holomorphic groups[i.e., Aut-holomorphic spaces
equipped with a topological group structure such that both the Aut-holomorphic
and topological group structures arise from a single connected complex Lie group
structure] and homomorphisms of Aut-holomorphic groups. If T is equal to TF
(respectively, TCG; TLG; TM; TH; TH⊞), then let Mk ∈Ob(T) be the object
determined by k (respectively, the object determined by O×
k ; the object deter-
mined by k×; the object determined byO⊿
k ; any object of TH equipped with a
co-holomorphicization κMk : Mk →AXell; any object of TH⊞ equipped with an
Aut-holomorphic homomorphismκMk : Mk →AXell (⊆AXell) [relative to themul-
tiplicative structure ofAXell]); ifT̸= TH,TH⊞ and κk is ak-Kummer structure on
Xell,t h e nw r i t eκMk : Mk →AXell for the restriction ofκk to Mk ⊆k.W es h a l l
refer to as amodel Aut-holomorphic T-pair any collection of data (a), (b), (c) of
the following form:
(a) the elliptically admissible Aut-holomorphic orbispaceXell,
(b) the object Mk ∈Ob(T),
(c) the datum κMk : Mk →AXell.
Also, we shall refer to the datumκMk of (c) as theKummer structureof the model
Aut-holomorphic T-pair; we shall often use the abbreviated notation (Xell
κ
↶ Mk)
for this collection of data (a), (b), (c).
(ii) We shall refer to any collection of data (X
κ
↶M) consisting of an elliptically
admissible Aut-holomorphic orbispace X, an object M ∈Ob(T), and a datum
κM : M →AX, which we shall refer to as theKummer structure of (X
κ
↶ M),
as an Aut-holomorphic T-pair if the following conditions are satisﬁed: (a)κM is
a continuous map between the underlying topological spaces wheneverT ̸= TH;
(b) κM is a collection of continuous maps from open subsets of the underlying
topological space ofM to the underlying topological space ofAX wheneverT = TH;
(c) for some model Aut-holomorphicT-pair (Xell
κ
↶ Mk) [where the notation is as
in (i)], there exist an isomorphismXell
∼
→X of objects ofTH a n da ni s o m o r p h i s m
Mk
∼
→M of objects ofTthat are compatible with the respectiveKummer structures
κMk : Mk →AXell, κM : M →AX. In this situation, we shall refer toX as the
structure-orbispaceand toM as thearithmetic dataof the Aut-holomorphicT-pair
(X
κ
↶ M); if, in this situation, the structure-orbispaceX arises from a hyperbolic
orbicurve which is of strictly Belyi type [cf. Remark 2.8.3], then we shall refer to
the Aut-holomorphicT-pair (X
κ
↶ M)a sb e i n gof strictly Belyi type.A morphism
of Aut-holomorphic T-pairs
φ:( X1
κ
↶ M1)→(X2
κ
↶ M2)
consists of amorphism of objectsφM : M1 →M2 of T, together with acompatible
[relative to the respective Kummer structures]ﬁnite ´etale morphismφX : X1 →X2
of TH; if, in this situation,φM (respectively, φX) is an isomorphism, then we shall
refer toφas aT-isomorphism (respectively, structure-isomorphism).
(iii) Write
Chol
T

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 103
for the category whose objects are the Aut-holomorphic T-pairs and whose mor-
phisms are themorphisms ofAut-holomorphic T-pairs. Also, we shall use the same
notation, except with “C”replacedby
C (respectively,C; C)
to denote the various subcategories determined by theT-isomorphisms (respec-
tively,structure-isomorphisms; isomorphisms); we shall use the same notation, with
“hol”replacedby
hol-sB
to denote the various full subcategories determined by the objectsof strictly Belyi
type. Since [in the notation of (i)] the formation ofO⊿
k (respectively,k×;O×
k ;O×
k )
from k (respectively,O⊿
k ;O⊿
k ; k×) is clearlyintrinsically deﬁned[i.e., depends only
on the “input data of an object ofT”], we thus obtainnatural functors
Chol
TF →Chol
TM; Chol
TM →Chol
TLG; Chol
TM →Chol
TCG; Chol
TLG →Chol
TCG
— i.e., by taking themultiplicative monoidof nonzero elements of absolute value
≤1 of the arithmetic data [i.e., nonzero elements of the closure of the set of elements
a such thatan →0a sn→∞], the associatedgroupiﬁcation Mgp of the arithmetic
data M,t h esubgroup of invertible elementsM× of the arithmetic dataM,o rt h e
maximal compact subgroupof the arithmetic data. Finally, we shall write
TH⊇EA⊇EAsB
for the subcategories determined, respectively, by theelliptically admissiblehyper-
bolic orbicurves over CAF’s and theﬁnite ´etale morphisms,a n db yt h eelliptically
admissible hyperbolic orbicurves of strictly Belyi type over CAF’s and theﬁnite
´etale morphisms; also, we shall use the same notation, except with “EA”replaced
by EA to denote the subcategory determined by the isomorphisms.T h u s , f o r
T ∈{TF,TCG,TLG,TM,TH,TH⊞}, the assignment (X
κ
↶ M) ↦→X determines
various compatible natural functors
Chol
T →EA
[as well asdouble underlinedversions of these functors].
(iv) Observe that [in the notation of (i)] the ﬁeld structure ofk determines,
via the inverse morphism to logk, a structure oftopological ﬁeldon the topological
group k∼;m o r e o v e r ,κk determines ak∼-Kummer structure onXell
κk∼ : k∼ ∼
→AXell
which may beuniquely characterized [i.e., among thetwo k∼-Kummer structures on
Xell] by the property that theco-holomorphicization determined byκk∼ coincides
with the co-holomorphicization determined by composing the composite of natural
maps k∼ ↠ k× ↪→k with the co-holomorphicization determined byκk. In par-
ticular, [cf. (i)] the co-holomorphicizations determined byκk, κk∼ are compatible

104 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
with logk. Since the various operations applied here to construct this ﬁeld struc-
ture onk∼ [such as, for instance, thepower seriesused to deﬁne logk] are clearly
intrinsically deﬁned [cf. the natural functors deﬁned in (iii)], we thus obtain that
the construction that assigns
(the topological ﬁeldk, with its Kummer structureκk)
↦→(the topological ﬁeldk∼, with its Kummer structureκk∼ )
determines anatural functor
logTF,TF :Chol
TF →Chol
TF
— which we shall refer to as thelog-Frobenius functor. Since logk determines a
functorial isomorphism between the ﬁelds k, k∼, it follows immediately that the
functor logTF,TF is isomorphic to the identity functor [hence, in particular, is an
equivalence of categories]. By composinglogTF,TF with the various natural functors
deﬁned in (iii), we also obtain, forT∈{TLG,TCG,TM}, a functor
logTF,T :Chol
TF →Chol
T
— which [by abuse of terminology] we shall also refer to as “the log-Frobenius
functor”. In a similar vein, the assignments
(the topological ﬁeldk, with its Kummer structureκk)
↦→(the Aut-holomorphic spacek×, with its Kummer structure [κk|k×])
(the topological ﬁeldk, with its Kummer structureκk)
↦→(the Aut-holomorphic spacek∼, with its Kummer structure [κk∼ ])
—w h e r et h e[−]’s denote the associatedco-holomorphicizations; the phrase “the
Aut-holomorphic space” should, strictly speaking, be interpreted as meaning “the
Aut-holomorphic space determined by” — determinenatural functors
λ× :Chol
TF →Chol
TH; λ∼ :Chol
TF →Chol
TH
together withdiagrams of functors
Chol
TF
logTF,TF
−→ C hol
TF
⏐⏐
↓
λ∼
ιlog
↶
⏐⏐
↓
λ×
Chol
TH = Chol
TH
Chol
TF
⏐⏐
↓
λ×
ι×
↶
⏐⏐
↓
λ∼
Chol
TH
—w h e r ew ew r i t eιlog : λ× ◦logTF,TF →λ∼ for the natural transformation in-
duced by the natural inclusion “(k∼)× ↪→k∼”a n dι× : λ∼ →λ× for the natural
transformation induced by the natural map “k∼ ↠ k×”. Finally, we note that
the ﬁelds “k∼” obtained by the above construction [i.e., the arithmetic data of the
objects in the image of the log-Frobenius functorlogTF,TF] are equipped with anat-
ural “subquotient compactum”— i.e., the compact subset“O×
k ⊆k×” that lies in

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 105
the natural quotient “k∼ ↠ k×” — which we shall refer to as thepre-log-shell of
logarith
TF,TF((X
κ
↶ M))
λ(X
κ
↶ M)
—w h e r e(X
κ
↶ M) ∈Ob(Chol
TF ); λ(X
κ
↶ M) is a subquotient of the arithmetic data
logarith
TF,TF((X
κ
↶ M)) of the object determined by applying the log-Frobenius functor
logTF,TF to the object (X
κ
↶ M).
(v) WriteLinHol [i.e., “linear holomorphic”] for the category whoseobjectsare
pairs (
X,X
κ
↶AX
)
consisting of an objectX ∈Ob(EA), together with thetautological Kummer map
AX
∼
→AX [i.e., given by theidentity on the object ofTF determined byAX] — all
of which is to be understood as constructed via thealgorithms of Corollary 2.7 [cf.
Remark 3.1.2] — and whosemorphisms are the morphisms induced by the [ﬁnite
´etale] morphisms ofEA [cf. the functorial algorithms of Corollary 2.7]. Thus, we
obtain anatural functor
EA
κLH
−→LinHol
which [as is easily veriﬁed] is anequivalence of categories, a quasi-inverse for which
is given by the natural projection functorLinHol→EA.
Remark 4.1.1. The topological monoid“O⊿
k ” associated to a CAFk [cf. Deﬁni-
tion 4.1, (i)] is essentially the data used to construct thearchimedean Frobenioids
of [Mzk17], Example 3.3, (ii).
Remark 4.1.2. Although, to simplify the discussion, we have chosen to require
that thestructure-orbispacealways beelliptically admissible, and that the base ﬁeld
always be aCAF, many aspects of the theory of the present§4m a yb eg e n e r a l -
ized to accommodate “structure-orbispaces” that are Aut-holomorphic orbispaces
that arise frommore general hyperbolic orbicurves[cf., e.g., Propositions 2.5, 2.6;
Remark 2.6.1] overarbitrary archimedean ﬁelds[i.e., either CAF’s or RAF’s — cf.
§0]. Such generalizations, however, are beyond the scope of the present paper.
Proposition 4.2. (First Properties of Aut-Holomorphic Pairs)
(i) LetT ∈{TM,TF,TLG,TCG}; (X
κ
↶ M),(X∗ κ
↶ M∗) ∈Ob(Chol
T ).T h e n
the natural functor of Deﬁnition 4.1, (iii), induces abijection [cf. Proposition
3.2, (iv)]
IsomChol
T
((X
κ
↶ M),(X∗ κ
↶ M∗))
∼
→IsomEA(X,X∗)
on sets of isomorphisms. In particular, the categoriesEA, Chol
T = Chol
T , Chol-sB
T =
Chol-sB
T are id-rigid.
(ii) The equivalence of categoriesκLH : EA
∼
→LinHol of Deﬁnition 4.1, (v)
— i.e., the functorial algorithms of Corollary 2.7 — determines a natural [1-
]factorization [cf. Proposition 3.2, (v)]
Chol
TF −→ Chol
TM
logTM,T
−→ Chol
T

106 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
—w h e r eT∈{TF,TLG,TCG,TM}; the ﬁrst arrow is the natural functor of Deﬁni-
tion 4.1, (iii) — of thelog-Frobenius functorslogTF,T :Chol
TF →Chol
T of Deﬁnition
4.1, (iv). Moreover, [whenT∈{TF,TM}] the functorlogT,T is isomorphic to the
identity functor[hence, in particular, is anequivalence of categories].
Proof. Thebijectivityportionofassertion(i)followsimmediatelyfromtherequired
compatibility of morphisms ofChol
T with theKummer structureso ft h eo b j e c t si n -
volved [cf. also thefunctorial algorithmsof Corollary 2.7]. To verify the id-rigidity
of EA, it suﬃces to observe that for any objectX ∈Ob(EA), which necessarily
arises from some elliptically admissible hyperbolic orbicurve X over a CAF, the
full subcategoryof EA consisting of objects that map toX may, by Corollary 2.3,
(i) [cf. also [Mzk14], Lemma 1.3, (iii)], be identiﬁed with the category of ﬁnite
´etale R-localizations“LocR(X)” [i.e., the subcategory of thecategory of ﬁnite ´etale
localizations “Loc(X)” of [Mzk10],§2, obtained by considering theR-linear mor-
phisms]. Thus, the id-rigidity ofEAfollows immediately from theslimnessassertion
ofLemma 4.3 below. In lightof thebijectivityportion of assertion(i), the id-rigidity
of the categoriesChol
T = Chol
T , Chol-sB
T = Chol-sB
T follows in a similar fashion. This
completes the proof of assertion (i). Assertion (ii) follows immediately from the
deﬁnitions [and thefunctorial algorithmsof Corollary 2.7].⃝
Remark 4.2.1. Note that, unlike the case with Proposition 3.2, (iv), the id-
rigidity portion of Proposition 4.2, (i), is [as is easily verifed]false for the “C”a n d
“C” versions ofChol
T , Chol-sB
T .
The following result is well-known.
Lemma 4.3. (Slimness of Archimedean Fundamental Groups) Let
X be a hyperbolic orbicurve over an archimedean ﬁeld kX. Then the ´etale
fundamental groupΠX of X is slim.
Proof. Let kX be analgebraic closureof kX. Thus, we have an exact sequence of
proﬁnite groups
1→ΔX →ΠX →G→1
[where ΔX
def
= π1(X ×kX kX); G
def
= Gal(kX/kX)]. Since ΔX is slim [cf., e.g.,
[Mzk20], Proposition 2.3, (i)], it suﬃces to consider the case where there exists
an element σ∈ΠX that maps to a nontrivial element σG ∈G ∼= Z/2Z and,
moreover, commutes with some open subgroupH ⊆ΠX. We may assume without
loss of generality thatH ⊆ΔX, and, moreover, thatH corresponds to a ﬁnite ´etale
covering ofX×kX kX which is ahyperbolic curve of genus≥2. In particular, by
replacing X by the ﬁnite ´etale covering ofX determined by the open subgroup of
ΠX generated byH and σ, we may assume thatσlies in the center ofΠX, and,
moreover, that X is a hyperbolic curve of genus≥2. In particular, by ﬁlling in
the cusps ofX, we may assume further thatX is proper.N o w i fl is any prime
number, then theﬁrst Chern classof, say, thecanonical bundleof X determines a
generatorofH2(X×kX kX,Ql(1))∼= H2(ΔX,Ql(1))[wherethe“(1)”denotesaTate
twist], hence anisomorphism of G-modules H2(ΔX,Ql)
∼
→Ql(−1). In particular,

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 107
it follows thatσacts nontrivially on H2(ΔX,Ql), in contradiction to the fact that
σlies in the center of ΠX. This contradiction completes the proof of Lemma 4.3.
⃝
Lemma 4.4. (Topological Distinguishability of Additive and Multi-
plicative Structures) Let k be a CAF [cf. Deﬁnition 4.1, (i)]. Then [in the
notation of Deﬁnition 4.1, (i)]no composite of the form
k× α
−→(k∼)× ↪→ k∼ ↠ k×
—w h e r et h e“×”o f“(k∼)×” is relative to the ﬁeld structure ofk∼ [cf. Deﬁnition
4.1, (iv)];αis an isomorphism of topological groups; “↪→” is the natural inclusion;
“↠” is the natural map — isbijective.
Proof. Indeed, the non-injectivity of k∼ ↠ k× implies that the composite under
consideration fails to be injective. ⃝
Corollary 4.5. ( Aut-Holomorphic Mono-anabelian Log-Frobenius Com-
patibility) Write
X
def
= Chol
T =Chol
T ; E
def
= EA; N
def
= Chol
TH
— where [in the notation of Deﬁnition 3.1]T∈{TM,TF}. Consider thediagram
of categoriesD
... X
log
−→ X
log
−→ X ...
... id⋎+1 ↘
⏐⏐↓id⋎ ↙ id⋎−1 ...
X
⏐⏐↓λ×
⏐⏐↓λ∼
N
⏐⏐↓
E
⏐⏐↓κLH
LinHol
⏐⏐↓
E
— where we use the notation “log”, “λ×”, “λ∼” for the arrows “logT,T”, “λ×”,
“λ∼” of Deﬁnition 4.1, (iv) [cf. also Proposition 4.2, (ii)]; we employ the conven-
tions of Corollary 3.6 concerning subdiagrams ofD; we writeL for the countably
ordered set determined by [cf.§0] the inﬁnite linear oriented graph ⃗Γopp
D≤1
[so
the elements ofL correspond to vertices of theﬁrst row ofD]a n d
L† def
= L ∪{□}

108 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
for the ordered set obtained by appending toL a formal symbol □ [which we think
of as corresponding to the unique vertex of thesecond row ofD] such that□ < ⋎,
for all ⋎∈L; id⋎ denotes the identity functor at the vertex⋎∈L.T h e n :
(i) Forn =4 ,5,6, D≤n admits a natural structure ofcore onD≤n−1. That is
to say, loosely speaking,E, LinHol “form cores” of the functors inD.
(ii) The assignments
(
X,X
κ
↶ AX
)
↦→(X
κ
↶ A
⊿
X), (X
κ
↶ AX)
[where we write “A
⊿
” for the monoid of nonzero elements of absolute value≤1 of
the CAF given by “A”] determine [i.e., for each choice ofT]a natural “forgetful”
functor
LinHol
φLH
−→ X
which is an equivalence of categories, a quasi-inverse for which is given by
the composite πLH : X→ LinHol of the natural projection functorX→E with
κLH :E→ LinHol; write ηLH : φLH ◦πLH
∼
→idX for the tautological isomorphism
arising from the deﬁnitions [cf. Deﬁnition 4.1, (i), (ii)]. Moreover,φLH gives rise
to atelecore structure TLH on D≤4, whose underlying diagram of categories we
denote byDLH, by appending toD≤5 telecore edges
LinHol
... φ⋎+1 ↙
⏐⏐↓φ⋎ ↘ φ⋎−1 ...
... X
log
−→ X
log
−→ X ...
LinHol
φ□
−→ X
from the core LinHol to the various copies ofX in D≤2 given by copies ofφLH,
w h i c hw ed e n o t eb yφ⋏,f o r⋏∈L†. That is to say, loosely speaking,φLH determines
a telecore structure onD≤4. Finally, for each⋏∈L†, let us write[β0
⋏] for the path
on ⃗ΓDLH of length 0 at ⋏ and [β1
⋏] for the path on⃗ΓDLH of length∈{4,5} [i.e.,
depending on whether or not ⋏ = □] that starts from ⋏, descends [say, viaλ×]
to the core vertex “LinHol”, and returns to⋏ via the telecore edgeφ⋏. Then the
collection of natural transformations
{η□⋎,η−1
□⋎,η⋏,η−1
⋏ }⋎∈L,⋏∈L†
— where we writeη□⋎ for the identity natural transformation from the arrowφ□ :
LinHol→X to the composite arrowid⋎ ◦φ⋎ : LinHol→X and
η⋏ :(DLH)[β1
⋏]
∼
→(DLH)[β0
⋏]
for the isomorphism arising fromηLH — generate acontact structureHLH on
the telecoreTLH.
(iii) The natural transformations
ιlog,⋎ : λ× ◦id⋎ ◦log→λ∼◦id⋎+1,ι × : λ∼ →λ×

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 109
[cf. Deﬁnition 4.1, (iv)] belong to afamily of homotopiesonD≤3 that determines
onD≤3 a structure ofobservable Slog onD≤2 and, moreover, iscompatible with
the families of homotopies that constitute thecore and telecore structures of (i),
(ii).
(iv) The diagram of categoriesD≤2 does not admit a structure of core on
D≤1 which [i.e., whose constituent family of homotopies] iscompatible with [the
constituent family of homotopies of] theobservable Slog of (iii). Moreover, the
telecore structure TLH of (ii), the contact structure HLH of (ii), and the
observable Slog of (iii) arenot simultaneously compatible[but cf. Remark
3.7.3, (ii)].
(v) The unique vertex □ of the second row ofD is a nexus of ⃗ΓD.M o r e -
over, D is totally □-rigid, and the natural action of Z on the inﬁnite linear
oriented graph⃗ΓD≤1 extends to an action ofZ on D by nexus-classes of self-
equivalences of D. Finally, the self-equivalences in these nexus-classes arecom-
patible with thefamilies of homotopiesthat constitute thecores and observ-
able of (i), (iii); these self-equivalences also extend naturally [cf. the technique of
extension applied in Deﬁnition 3.5, (vi)] to the diagram of categories [cf. Deﬁnition
3.5, (iv), (a)] that constitutes thetelecore of (ii), in a fashion that iscompatible
with both the family of homotopies that constitutes this telecore structure [cf.
Deﬁnition 3.5, (iv), (b)] and thecontact structureHLH of (ii).
Proof. Assertions (i), (ii) are immediate from the deﬁnitions [and thefunctorial
algorithms of Corollary 2.7] — cf. also the proofs of Corollary 3.6, (i), (ii). Next,
we consider assertion (iii). If, for ⋎ ∈L, one denotes by “k×
⋎” the arithmetic
data of type TLG [which we may be obtained from an arithmetic data of type
T∈{TM,TF} via the natural functors of Deﬁnition 4.1, (iii)] of a“typical object”of
the copy ofX at the vertex⋎ofD≤1,t h e nι× “applied at the vertex⋎” corresponds
to thenatural surjectionk∼
⋎ ↠ k×
⋎, whileιlog,⋎ corresponds to thenatural inclusion
k×
⋎ ↪→k∼
⋎+1,w h e r ew et h i n ko fk×
⋎ as being obtained fromk×
⋎+1 via the application
of log.I np a r t i c u l a r ,b yletting ⋎∈L vary and composing these natural surjections
and inclusions,w eo b t a i nadiagram
... ↪ →k∼
⋎ ↠ k×
⋎ ↪→k∼
⋎+1 ↠ k×
⋎+1 ↪→k∼
⋎+2 ↠ k×
⋎+2 ↪→ ...
[which iscompatiblewith the variousKummer structures— cf. Remark 4.5.1, (i),
below; the deﬁnition of Chol
TH in Deﬁnition 4.1, (i), (ii), (iii)]. The paths on [the
oriented graph corresponding to] this diagram may be classiﬁed intofour types,
which correspond [by composing, in an alternating fashion, various pull-backs of
“ιlog,⋎” with various pull-backs ofι×]t o homotopies on D≤3, as follows [cf. the
notational conventions of the proof of Corollary 3.6]:
(1) the path corresponding to the composite “k×
⋎ →k∼
⋎+n”, which yields a
homotopy for pairs of paths ([λ×]◦[id⋎]◦[log]n ◦[γ],[λ∼]◦[id⋎+n]◦[γ])
(2) the path corresponding to the composite “k×
⋎ →k×
⋎+n”, which yields a
homotopy for pairs of paths ([λ×]◦[id⋎]◦[log]n ◦[γ],[λ×]◦[id⋎+n]◦[γ])
(3) the path corresponding to the composite “k∼
⋎ →k∼
⋎+n”, which yields a
homotopy for pairs of paths ([λ∼]◦[id⋎]◦[log]n ◦[γ],[λ∼]◦[id⋎+n]◦[γ])

110 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(4) the path corresponding to the composite “k∼
⋎ →k×
⋎+n−1”, which yields a
homotopy for pairs of paths ([λ∼]◦[id⋎]◦[log]n−1◦[γ],[λ×]◦[id⋎+n−1]◦[γ])
—w h e r en ≥1 is an integer and [γ]i sap a t ho nD≤1; in the case oftype (4),i t
is convenient to include also the pair of paths ([λ∼],[λ×]), for which the natural
transformation ι× determines ahomotopy. In addition, it is natural to consider the
“identity homotopies”associated to the pairs
(5) ([ γ],[γ]), where [γ]i sap a t ho nD≤3 whose terminal vertex lies in the
third row ofD≤3.
Thus, if we takeElog to be the set of ordered pairs of paths on⃗ΓD≤3 consisting
of pairs of paths of the above ﬁve types, then one veriﬁes immediately thatElog
satisﬁes the conditions (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) given in§0 for a saturated set.I n
particular, the various homotopies discussed above yield a family of homotopies
which determines anobservable Slog, as desired. Moreover, it is immediate from the
deﬁnitions — i.e., in essence, because the variousstructure-orbispacesthat appear
remain “undisturbed”by the various manipulations involvingarithmetic datathat
arise from “ιlog,⋎”, “ι×” — that this family of homotopies iscompatible with the
families of homotopies that constitute thecore and telecorestructures of (i), (ii).
This completes the proof of assertion (iii).
Next, we consider assertion (iv). Suppose thatD≤2 admits a structure ofcore
on D≤1 in a fashion that iscompatiblewith the observableSlog of (iii). Then this
core structure determines a homotopyζ0 for the pair of paths ([id⋎],[id⋎−1]◦[log])
[for ⋎∈L]; thus, bycomposingtheresult ζ′
0 ofapplying λ× toζ0 withthehomotopy
ζ1 associated [via Slog] to the pair of paths ([λ×]◦[id⋎−1]◦[log],[λ∼]◦[id⋎]) [of
t y p e( 1 ) ]a n dt h e nw i t ht h eh o m o t o p yζ2 associated [via Slog] to the pair of paths
([λ∼]◦[id⋎],[λ×]◦[id⋎]) [of type (4)], we obtain a natural transformation
ζ′
1 = ζ2 ◦ζ1 ◦ζ′
0 : λ× ◦id⋎ →λ× ◦id⋎
— which, in order for the desiredcompatibility to hold, must coincide with the
“identity homotopy”[of type (5)]. On the other hand, by writing out explicitly the
meaning of such an equalityζ′
1 = id, we conclude that we obtain acontradictionto
Lemma 4.4. This completes the proof of theﬁrst incompatibilityof assertion (iv).
The proof of thesecond incompatibilityof assertion (iv) is entirely similar [cf. the
proof of Corollary 3.6, (iv)]. This completes the proof of assertion (iv).
Finally, thetotal □-rigidity portion of assertion (v) follows immediately from
Proposition 4.2, (i) [cf. also the ﬁnal portion of Proposition 4.2, (ii)]; the remainder
of assertion (v) follows immediately from the deﬁnitions.⃝
Remark 4.5.1.
(i) The“output”of the observableSlog of Corollary 4.5, (iii), may be summa-
rized intuitively in the following diagram [cf. Remark 3.6.1, (i)]:
... k ×
⋎+1 ↞ k∼
⋎+1 ←↩k ×
⋎ ↞ k∼
⋎ ←↩k ×
⋎−1 ↞ k∼
⋎−1 ...
κ
↶
κ
↶
κ
↶
κ
↶
κ
↶
κ
↶
... X⋎+1
∼
← X⋎+1
∼
← X⋎
∼
← X⋎
∼
← X⋎−1
∼
← X⋎−1 ...

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 111
— where the arrows “↞” are the natural surjections [cf.ι×!]; k×
⋎,f o r⋎∈L,i sa
copy of “k×” that arises, via id⋎, from the vertex⋎ ofD≤1; the arrows “←↩”a r et h e
inclusions arising from the fact thatk×
⋎ is obtained by applying thelog-Frobenius
functor log to k×
⋎+1 [cf. ιlog,⋎!]; the “
κ
↶ ’s” denote the variousKummer structures
involved; the isomorphic “X⋎’ s ”c o r r e s p o n dt ot h ecoricity of E [cf. Corollary 4.5,
(i)]. Finally, theincompatibilityassertions of Corollary 4.5, (iv), may be thought of
as a statement of thenon-existence of some“universal reference model”
k×
model
that maps isomorphically to the variousk×
⋎’s in a fashion that iscompatible with
the various arrows “↞”, “←↩” of the above diagram.
(ii) In words, the essential content of Corollary 4.5 may be understood as
follows [cf. the“intuitive diagram”of (i)]:
Although the operation represented by thelog-Frobenius functoris com-
patible with the [Aut-holomorphic] structure-orbispaces, hence with the
“software”constituted by the algorithms of Corollary 2.7, it isnot compat-
iblewith the additive or multiplicative structures on the variousarithmetic
data involved — cf. Remark 3.6.1.
That is to say, more concretely, if one starts with anelliptically admissible Aut-
holomorphic orbispaceX on which [for some CAFk] k× “acts via the local linear
holomorphic structures of Corollary 2.7, (e)” [i.e.,X is equipped with aKummer
structure X
κ
↶ k×], then applies logk to the universal coveringk∼ →k× to equip
k∼ with aﬁeld structure, with respect to whichk∼ “acts” on some isomorphX′ of
X
k× ↞ k∼ ←↩ (k∼)×
κ
↶
κ
↶
X
∼
→ X′
[where the “×”o f“ (k∼)×” is taken with respect to this ﬁeld structure ofk∼], then
although the “actions” ofk×,( k∼)× on X
∼
→X′ are not strictly compatible[i.e., the
diagram doesnot commute], they become “compatible” if one“loosens one’s notion
of compatibility”to the notion of being “compatible with the [Aut-]holomorphic
structure”of the various objects involved [cf. the analogy of Remark 2.7.3]. This
state of aﬀairs may be expressed formally as acompatibility between the various
co-holomorphicizations involved [cf. the deﬁnition ofChol
TH in Deﬁnition 4.1, (i),
(ii), (iii)]. In summary, as should be evident from its statement, Corollary 4.5 is
intended as anarchimedean analogueof Corollary 3.6. In particular, the“general
formal content”of Remarks 3.6.1, 3.6.2, 3.6.3, 3.6.5, 3.6.6, and 3.6.7 applies to the
present archimedean situation, as well.
Remark 4.5.2. By comparison to thenonarchimedeancase treated in§3, certain
— butnot all! — of the“arrows”that appear in the archimedean case go in the
opposite direction to the nonarchimedean case. This is somewhat reminiscent of
the “product formula”in elementary number theory, where, for instance, positive

112 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
powers of prime numbers→0 at nonarchimedean primes, but→∞at archimedean
primes. In the context of Corollary 4.5, perhaps the most important example of
this phenomenon is given by “ι×”. This leads to a somewhat diﬀerent structure for
the observable Slog of Corollary 4.5, (iii) — involving “archimedean” homotopies
of arbitrarily large “length” [cf. the “non-[γ]-portion” of the pairs of paths of types
(1), (2), (3), (4) in the proof of Corollary 4.5, (iii)] — from the structure of the
observable Slog of Corollary 3.6, (iii) — which involves“nonarchimedean”paths of
bounded “length” [cf. the “non-[γ]-portion” of the pairs of paths of types (1), (2)
in the proof of Corollary 3.6, (iii)].
Remark 4.5.3.
(i) Byreplacing
“λ×pf”b y“ λ∼”,
“ι× = ι× : λ× →λ×pf”b y“ ι× = ι× : λ∼ →λ×”, and
“Corollary 1.10” by “Corollary 2.7”,
[and making various other suitable revisions] one obtains an essentially straightfor-
ward “Aut-holomorphic translation”of thebi-anabelian incompatibilityresult given
in Corollary 3.7. We leave the routine details to the reader.
(ii) The “general formal content”of Remarks 3.7.1, 3.7.2, 3.7.3, 3.7.4, 3.7.5,
3.7.7, and 3.7.8 applies to thearchimedean analogueof Corollary 3.7 discussed in
(i) — cf. also the analogy of Remark 2.7.3; the discussion in Remark 2.7.4 of“ﬁxed
reference models”in the context of the deﬁnition of the notion of a“holomorphic
structure”.
(iii) With regard to the discussion in Remark 3.7.4 of“functorially trivial mod-
els”[i.e., models that “arise from Π” without essential use of Π, hence are equipped
with trivial functorial actions of Π], we note that although “the Galois group Π”
does not appear in the presentarchimedeancontext, the “functorial detachment”
of such “functorially trivial models” means, for instance, that if one regards some
model Xmodel as “arising”from an elliptically admissible Aut-holomorphic orbis-
pace X in a “trivial fashion”, then when one applies the“elliptic cuspidalization”
portion of thealgorithm of Corollary 2.7, (b), the various coverings ofX involved in
this elliptic cuspidalization algorithmfunctorially induce trivial coveringsof Xmodel,
hence do not give rise to afunctorial isomorphism of the respective “base ﬁelds”
[cf. Remark 2.7.3] ofX, Xmodel.
(iv)WithregardtothediscussioninRemark3.7.5, onemaygivean archimedean
analogue of the“pathological versions of the Kummer map”given in Remark 3.7.5,
(ii), by composing thek-Kummer structure[cf. Deﬁnition 4.1, (i)] “κk : k
∼
→AXell”,
restricted, say, tok×,w i t ht h e[non-additive!] automorphism of
k× ∼
→O×
k ×R>0
that acts as the identity onO×
k and is given byraising to theλ-th power[for some
λ∈R>0]o nR>0.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 113
Section 5: Global Log-Frobenius Compatibility
In the present§5, weglobalize the theory of§3, §4. This globalization allows
one to constructcanonical rigid compacta— i.e., canonical integral structures—
that enable one to consider[“pana-”]localizations of global arithmetic line bundles
[cf. Corollary 5.5] without obliterating the“volume-theoretic”information inherent
in the theory of global arithmetic degrees, and in a fashion that is compatible with
the operation of“mono-analyticization”[cf. Corollary 5.10] — i.e., the operation
of “disabling the rigidity”of one of the“two combinatorial dimensions” of a ring
[cf. Remark 5.6.1]. The resulting theory is reminiscent, in certain formal respects,
of thep-adic Teichm¨uller theoryof [Mzk1], [Mzk4] [cf. Remark 5.10.3].
Deﬁnition 5.1.
(i)Let F bea number ﬁeld. Thenweshallwrite V(F)forthesetof[archimedean
and nonarchimedean] valuations of F,a n dV⊚(F)
def
= V(F) ⋃{⊚F},w h e r et h e
symbol “⊚F” is to be thought of as representing theglobal ﬁeldF, or, alternatively,
the generic primeof F.I f F is analgebraic closureof F, then we shall write
V(F/F )
def
= lim←−K
V(K); V⊚(F/F )
def
= lim←−K
V⊚(K)
[where K ranges over the ﬁnite extensions ofF in F] for the inverse limits relative
to the evident systems of morphisms. The inverse system of “⊚K’s” determines
a unique global element ⊚F ∈V⊚(F/F ); the other elements of V⊚(F/F ) lie in
the image of the natural injectionV(F/F ) ↪→V⊚(F/F ) and will be calledlocal;
moreover, we have a natural decomposition
V(F/F )= V(F/F )arc ⋃
V(F/F )non
into archimedean and nonarchimedean local elements. There is a natural contin-
uous action of Gal(F/F ) on the pro-sets V(F/F ), V⊚(F/F ). For K ⊆F aﬁ -
nite extension of F, V(K), V⊚(K) may be identiﬁed, respectively, with the sets
of Gal(F/K)( ⊆Gal(F/F ))-orbits V(F/F )/Gal(F/K), V⊚(F/F )/Gal(F/K)o f
V(F/F ), V⊚(F/F ).
(ii) LetX be anelliptically admissible [cf. [Mzk21], Deﬁnition 3.1]hyperbolic
orbicurve over a totally imaginary number ﬁeld F [so X is also of strictly Belyi
type — cf. Remark 2.8.3]. Write ΠX for the ´etale fundamental group of X [for
some choice of basepoint]; ΠX ↠ GF
def
= Gal(F/F ) for the natural surjection onto
the absolute Galois groupGF of F [for some choice of algebraic closureF of F];
ΔX ⊆ΠX for the kernel of this surjection [which may be characterized “group-
theoretically” as themaximal topologically ﬁnite generated closed normal subgroup
of ΠX — cf., e.g., [Mzk9], Lemma 1.1.4, (i)]. Write
Fmod ⊆F
for the“ﬁeld of moduli ofX”, i.e., the subﬁeld ofF determined by the [open] image
of Aut(XF) [i.e., the group of automorphisms of the schemeXF
def
= X ×F F]i n

114 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Aut(F)=G a l (F/Q)( ⊇GF); Aut(X), Aut(F) for the respective automorphism
groups of the schemes X, Spec(F). For simplicity, we also make the following
assumption onX:
F is Galois over Fmod; the natural homomorphism Aut(X) →Aut(F)
surjects onto Gal(F/Fmod)( ⊆Aut(F)); we have anatural isomorphism
Aut(X/F)
∼
→Aut(XF/F)
between the group ofF-automorphisms ofX and the group ofF-automor-
phisms ofXF.
This assumption onX implies that we have anatural isomorphism
Aut(X)×Gal(F/Fmod) Gal(F/F mod)
∼
→ Aut(XF)
[induced by theﬁber product structureXF = X×F F], and hence that thenatural
exact sequence 1 →Aut(XF/F) →Aut(XF) →Gal(F/F mod) →1a d m i t sa
natural surjectiononto thenatural exact sequence
1→Aut(X/F)→Aut(X)→Gal(F/Fmod)→1
[induced by the projection Aut(X)×Gal(F/Fmod) Gal(F/F mod) ↠ Aut(X)t ot h e
ﬁrst factor]. Note that by thefunctoriality of thealgorithms of Theorem 1.9, it fol-
lowsthatthereisa natural isomorphismAut(X)
∼
→Out(ΠX)thatis compatiblewith
the natural morphisms Aut(X) ↠ Gal(F/Fmod) ↪→Aut(F) ∼= Out(GF) [cf., e.g.,
[Mzk15], Theorem 3.1], Out(ΠX)→Out(GF); in particular, one mayfunctorially
construct the imageGFmod ↪→Aut(GF) as the inverse image [i.e., via the natural
projection Aut(GF)→Out(GF)] of the image of Out(ΠX)→Out(GF). Next, ob-
serve that one mayfunctorially construct“F”f r o mΠX as the ﬁeld “k
×
NF
⋃{0} (∼=
kNF)” constructed in Theorem 1.9, (e) [cf. also Remark 1.10.1, (i)]; denote this ﬁeld
constructed from ΠX by kNF(ΠX); we shall also use the notationk
×
NF(ΠX) for the
group of nonzero elements of this ﬁeld. In particular, by considering [cf. Corollary
2.8] valuations on the ﬁeldkNF(ΠX) [where each valuation is valued in the “copy of
R” given by completing the group “k
×
NF” with respect to the“order topology”de-
termined by the valuation], one mayfunctorially construct“V⊚(F/F )”, “V(F/F )”
from ΠX; denote the resulting pro-sets constructed in this way byV⊚(ΠX), V(ΠX)
and thecompletion of kNF(ΠX)a tv∈V(ΠX)b ykNF(ΠX,v). Forv∈V(F/F )non,
write
ΠX,v ⊆ΠX
for thedecomposition groupof v [i.e., the closed subgroup of elements of ΠX that
ﬁx v]; forv∈V(F/F )arc,w r i t e
Xell,v
for the Aut-holomorphic orbispace“Xv” [associated toX at v] of Corollary 2.8,
δell,v :ΔX
∼
→π1(Xell,v)∧
for thenatural outer isomorphismof ΔX with the proﬁnite completion [denoted by
the superscript “∧”] of the topological fundamental group ofXell,v,a n d
κell,v : kNF(ΠX) ↪→AXell,v

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 115
for thenatural inclusion of ﬁelds[i.e., arising from the isomorphism of topological
ﬁelds of Corollary 2.9, (b)]. When we wish to regardXell,v as an objectconstructed
from ΠX [cf. Corollary 2.8], we shall use the notationX(ΠX,v) [where we regard
v as an element ofV(ΠX)arc]. Finally, we observe that Aut(ΠX) acts naturallyon
all of these objects constructed from ΠX. In particular, we have anatural bijection
V⊚(ΠX)/Aut(ΠX)
∼
→V⊚(Fmod). Forv∈V(Fmod), writedmod
v
def
=[ FvF :( Fmod)v]
for the degree of the completion ofF at any vF ∈V(F) that dividesv over the
completion (Fmod)v of Fmod at v.
(iii) Write
EA⊚
for the category whose objects areproﬁnite groupsisomorphic to ΠX for someX
as in (ii), and whose morphisms areopen injections of proﬁnite groups that in-
duce isomorphisms between the respective maximal topologically ﬁnitely generated
closed normal subgroups [i.e., the respective “ΔX”]. We shall refer to as aglobal
Galois-theater any collection of data
V⊚ def
=( Π↷ V
⊚
,{Πv}v∈V
non,{(Xv,δv,κv)}v∈V
arc)
—w h e r eΠ∈Ob(EA⊚); we shall refer to Π as theglobal Galois groupof the Galois-
theater; we write Δ⊆Π for themaximal topologically ﬁnitely generated closed
normal subgroupof Π;V
⊚
is apro-setequipped with acontinuous action byΠt h a t
decomposesintoadisjointunion V
⊚
={⊚V} ⋃V
non ⋃V
arc
⊇V
def
= V
non ⋃V
arc
;
for v ∈V
non
,Πv ⊆Πi st h eclosed subgroupof elements that ﬁxv;f o rv ∈V
arc
,
Xv is an Aut-holomorphic orbispace, δv :Δ
∼
→π1(Xv)∧ is an outer isomorphism of
proﬁnite groups, andκv : kNF(Π)↪→AXv is an inclusion of ﬁelds — such that there
exists a(n) [unique! — cf. Remark 5.1.1 below]isomorphism of pro-sets
ψV : V⊚(Π)
∼
→V
⊚
— which we shall refer to as areference isomorphismforV⊚ — that satisﬁes the fol-
lowing conditions: (a)ψV is Π-equivariantand maps⊚kNF(Π)↦→⊚V , V⊚(Π)non ∼
→
V
non
, V⊚(Π)arc ∼
→V
arc
; (b) for V⊚(Π)arc ∋ vell ↦→v ∈V
arc
, there exists a(n)
[unique! — cf. Remark 5.1.1 below] isomorphism ψv : X(Π,vell)
∼
→Xv of Aut-
holomorphic spaces that iscompatible with δell,vell, δv,a sw e l la sw i t hκell,vell, κv.
A morphism of global Galois-theaters
φ:( Π1 ↷ V
⊚
1 ,{(Π1)v1},{((X1)v1,δv1,κv1)})
→(Π2 ↷ V
⊚
2 ,{(Π2)v2},{((X2)v2,δv2,κv2)})
is deﬁned to consist of a morphism φΠ :Π1 ↪→Π2 of EA⊚ and a(n) [uniquely
determined — cf. Remark 5.1.1 below]isomorphism of pro-setsφV : V
⊚
1
∼
→V
⊚
2
that satisfy the following conditions: (a)φΠ, φV are compatible with the actions
of Π1,Π2 on V
⊚
1 , V
⊚
2
,a n dm a p⊚V1
↦→ ⊚V2
, V
non
1
∼
→V
non
2 , V
arc
1
∼
→V
arc
2 ;( b )
for V
arc
1 ∋ v1 ↦→v2 ∈V
arc
2 , there exists a [unique! — cf. Remark 5.1.1 below]
isomorphism φv : Xv1
∼
→Xv2 of Aut-holomorphic spaces that iscompatible with

116 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
δv1, δv2,a sw e l la sw i t hκv1, κv2. [Here, we note that (a) implies that forV
non
1 ∋
v1 ↦→v2 ∈V
non
2 , φΠ induces an open injectionφv :Πv1 ↪→Πv2.]
(iv) In the notation of (iii), we shall refer to as apanalocal Galois-theaterany
collection of data
V✠ def
=( V ⊚,{Πv}v∈Vnon,{Xv}v∈Varc)
—where V ⊚ isasetthatdecomposesasadisjointunion V ⊚ ={⊚V} ⋃Vnon ⋃Varc
⊇V
def
= Vnon ⋃Varc;f o rv∈Vnon,Πv ∈Ob(Orb(TG)) [cf.§0; Deﬁnition 3.1, (iii)];
for v∈Varc, Xv ∈Ob(Orb(EA)) [cf. Deﬁnition 4.1, (iii)] — such that there exists
aΠ ∈Ob(EA⊚)a n da nisomorphism of sets
ψV : V⊚(Π)/Aut(Π)
∼
→V ⊚
— which we shall refer to as areference isomorphismfor V✠ — that satisﬁes the
following conditions: (a) the composite of ψV with the quotient mapV⊚(Π) ↠
V⊚(Π)/Aut(Π) maps ⊚kNF(Π) ↦→ ⊚V , V(Π)non ↠ Vnon, V(Π)arc ↠ Varc;( b )
for each v ∈Vnon,Π v is isomorphic to the object of Orb(TG) determined by
“the decomposition groupΠv ⊆Πo fv, considered up to automorphisms of Πv,
as v ∈V(Π) ranges over the elements lying overv”; (c) for eachv ∈Varc, Xv is
isomorphic to the object of Orb(EA) determined by “the Aut-holomorphic orbispace
X(Π,v), considered up toautomorphisms of X(Π,v), asv ∈V(Π) ranges over the
elements lying overv”. Amorphism of panalocal Galois-theaters
φ:( V ⊚
1 ,{(Π1)v1},{(X1)v1})→(V ⊚
2 ,{(Π2)v2},{(X2)v2})
is deﬁned to consist of a bijection of setsφV : V ⊚
1
∼
→V ⊚
2 that induces bijections
Vnon
1
∼
→Vnon
2 , Varc
1
∼
→Varc
2 , together with open injections of [orbi-]proﬁnite groups
(Π1)v1 ↪→(Π2)v2 [where Vnon
1 ∋ v1 ↦→v2 ∈Vnon
2 ; we recall that, in the notation
of (ii), “F/Fmod”i sGalois], and isomorphisms of [orbi-]Aut-holomorphic orbis-
paces (X1)v1
∼
→(X2)v2 [where Varc
1 ∋ v1 ↦→v2 ∈Varc
2 ]. [Here, we observe that
the existence of the isomorphisms “(X1)v1
∼
→(X2)v2” implies — by considering
Euler characteristics [cf. also [Mzk20], Theorem 2.6, (v)] — that the open injec-
tions “(Π1)v1 ↪→(Π2)v2” induce isomorphisms “Δ1
∼
→Δ2” between the respective
geometric fundamental groups.] Write Th⊚ (respectively, Th✠) for the category
of global (respectively, panalocal) Galois-theaters and morphisms of global (respec-
tively, panalocal) Galois-theaters. Thus, it follows immediately from the deﬁnitions
that we obtain a natural“panalocalization functor”
Th⊚ →Th✠
—w h i c hi sessentially surjective.
(v) LetT∈{TF,TM,TLG} [cf. the notation of Deﬁnition 3.1, (i)]. IfT = TF,
then let T⊚ def
= T;i f T ̸= TF,t h e nl e tT⊚ def
= TLG;i f T⊚ ̸= T, then a superscript
“T⊚” will be used to denote the operation ofgroupiﬁcation of a monoid[i.e., “gp”];
if T⊚ = T, then a superscript “T⊚” will be used to denote the “identity operation”
[i.e., may be ignored]. If Π∈Ob(EA⊚), then let us writeMT⊚(Π) for the object of
T⊚, equipped with a continuous action by Π, determined bykNF(Π) [ifT⊚ = TF],

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 117
k
×
NF(Π) [ifT⊚ = TLG], equipped with thediscrete topology;i f v ∈V(Π), then let
us write MT(Π,v) for the object ofT, equipped with a continuous action by the
decomposition group Πv ⊆Πo fv, determined bykNF(Π,v) [ifT⊚ = TF], k
×
NF(Π,v)
[if T⊚ = TLG],O⊿
kNF(Π,v) [if T⊚ = TM]. Aglobal T-pairis deﬁned to be a collection
of data
M⊚ def
=( V⊚,M ⊚,{ρv}v∈V ,{(Πv ↷ Mv)}v∈V
non,{(Xv
κ
↶ Mv)}v∈V
arc)
—w h e r e
V⊚ =( Π↷ V
⊚
,{Πv}v∈V
non,{(Xv,δv,κv)}v∈V
arc)
is a global Galois-theater; V = V
non ⋃V
arc
; M ⊚ ∈Ob(T⊚), which we shall refer
to as theglobal arithmetic dataof M⊚, is equipped with acontinuous action by
Π; for eachv ∈V
non
,( Πv ↷ Mv)i sa n MLF-Galois T-pair with Galois group
given by Πv;f o re a c hv ∈V
arc
,( Xv
κ
↶ Mv)i sa nA u t-holomorphic T-pair with
structure-orbispace given by Xv;f o re a c hv ∈V, ρv : M ⊚ →MT⊚
v is a [“re-
striction”] morphism inT⊚ — such that, relative to somereference isomorphism
ψV : V⊚(Π)
∼
→V
⊚
for V⊚ as in (iii), there existisomorphisms [in T⊚, T, respec-
tively]
ψ⊚ : MT⊚(Π)
∼
→M ⊚; {ψv : MT(Π,v)
∼
→Mv}v∈V
— which we shall refer to asreference isomorphismsfor M⊚ — that satisfy the
followingconditions: (a) ψ⊚ isΠ-equivariant; (b)forv∈V
non
,ψv isΠv-equivariant;
(c) for v ∈V
arc
, the composite ofψv with the Kummer structure of (Xv
κ
↶ Mv)
is compatible with κv;( d )ψ⊚, {ψv}v∈V are compatible with the{ρv}v∈V , relative
to the natural restriction morphisms ρv(Π) : MT⊚(Π)→MT(Π,v)T⊚
.I n t h i s
situation, ifT̸= TF, then we shall refer to the proﬁnite Π-module
μ ˆZ(M ⊚)
def
= Hom(Q/Z,M ⊚)
[which is isomorphic to ˆZ]a st h ecyclotome associated to this globalT-pair and
write μQ/Z(M ⊚)
def
= μ ˆZ(M ⊚)⊗Q/Z.A morphism of globalT-pairs
φ:(V⊚
1 ,M ⊚
1 ,{ρv1},{((Π1)v1 ↷ (M1)v1)},{((X1)v1
κ
↶ (M1)v1)})
→(V⊚
2 ,M ⊚
2 ,{ρv2},{((Π2)v2 ↷ (M2)v2)},{((X2)v2
κ
↶ (M2)v2)})
is deﬁned to consist of a morphism of global Galois-theaters φV⊚ : V⊚
1 →V ⊚
2 ,
together with an isomorphism φ⊚ : M ⊚
1
∼
→M ⊚
2 of T⊚,a n disomorphisms φv1 :
(M1)v1
∼
→(M2)v2 [where V1 ∋ v1 ↦→v2 ∈V2]i n T, that satisfy the following
compatibility conditions: (a) φ⊚ is equivariant with respect to the open injection
Π1 ↪→Π2 arising fromφV⊚; (b) forv1 ∈V
non
1 , the isomorphismφv1 is compatible
with the actions of (Π1)v1,( Π2)v2, relative to the open injection (Π1)v1 ↪→(Π2)v2
induced by φV⊚;( c )f o rv1 ∈V
arc
1 , the isomorphism φv1 is compatible with the
Kummer structures of ((X1)v1
κ
↶ (M1)v1), ((X2)v2
κ
↶ (M2)v2), relative to the iso-
morphism (X1)v1
∼
→(X2)v2 induced by φV⊚;( d )φ⊚, {φv1}v1∈V1
are compatible
with the{ρv1}v1∈V1
, {ρv2}v2∈V2
.

118 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(vi) In the notation of (v), apanalocal T-pair is deﬁned to be a collection of
data
M✠ def
=( V✠,{(Πv ↷ Mv)}v∈Vnon,{(Xv
κ
↶ Mv)}v∈Varc)
—w h e r eV✠ =( V ⊚,{Πv}v∈Vnon,{Xv}v∈Varc)i sa panalocal Galois-theater;f o re a c h
v ∈Vnon,( Πv ↷ Mv) is a(n) [strictly speaking, “orbi-”]MLF-Galois T-pair with
Galois group given by Πv;f o re a c hv∈Varc,( Xv
κ
↶ Mv) is a(n) [strictly speaking,
“orbi-”]Aut-holomorphic T-pairwith structure-orbispace given byXv.A morphism
of panalocalT-pairs
φ:(V✠
1 ,{((Π1)v1 ↷ (M1)v1)},{((X1)v1
κ
↶ (M1)v1)})
→(V✠
2 ,{((Π2)v2 ↷ (M2)v2)},{((X2)v2
κ
↶ (M2)v2)})
is deﬁned to consist of a morphism of panalocal Galois-theaters φV✠ : V✠
1 →
V✠
2 , together with compatible T-isomorphisms of [orbi-]MLF-Galois T-pairs φv1 :
((Π1)v1 ↷ (M1)v1) →((Π2)v2 ↷ (M2)v2)[ w h e r eVnon
1 ∋ v1 ↦→v2 ∈Vnon
2 ]a n d
[orbi-]Aut-holomorphic T-pairs φv1 :( (X1)v1
κ
↶ (M1)v1) →((X2)v2
κ
↶ (M2)v2)
[where Varc
1 ∋ v1 ↦→v2 ∈Varc
2 ]. Write Th⊚
T (respectively, Th✠
T ) for the category
of global (respectively, panalocal) T-pairs and morphisms of global (respectively,
panalocal) T-pairs. Thus, it follows immediately from the deﬁnitions that we ob-
tain a natural“panalocalization functor”
Th⊚
T →Th✠
T
— lying over the functor Th⊚ → Th✠ of (iv) — which isessentially surjective.
Moreover, we havecompatible natural functorsTh⊚ →EA⊚, Th⊚
T →EA⊚,a sw e l l
as natural functors
Th⊚
TF →Th⊚
TM; Th⊚
TM →Th⊚
TLG; Th✠
TF →Th✠
TM; Th✠
TM →Th✠
TLG
[cf. Deﬁnition 3.1, (iii); Deﬁnition 4.1, (iii)].
Remark 5.1.1. Note that thereference isomorphismψV of Deﬁnition 5.1, (iii), is
uniquely determinedbytheconditionsstated. Indeed, for nonarchimedeanelements,
this follows by considering the stabilizers in Π of elements ofV
non
, together with the
well-known fact that a nonarchimedean prime ofF [cf. the notation of Deﬁnition
5.1, (ii)] is uniquely determined by any open subgroup of its decomposition group
in GF [cf., e.g., [NSW], Corollary 12.1.3]; forarchimedean elements, this follows
by considering the topology induced on kNF(Π) byAXv via “κv”f o rv ∈V
arc
.
Moreover, for v ∈V
arc
, the isomorphism ψv of Deﬁnition 5.1, (iii), is uniquely
determined by the condition of compatibility withδell,vell, δv. Indeed, by Corollary
2.3, (i) [cf. also [Mzk14], Lemma 1.3, (iii)], this follows from the well-known fact
that any automorphism of a hyperbolic orbicurve that induces the identity outer
automorphism of the proﬁnite fundamental group of the orbicurve is itself the
identity automorphism. Similar uniqueness statements [with similar proofs] hold
for the morphismsφV , φv of Deﬁnition 5.1, (iii).
Corollary 5.2. (First Properties of Galois-theaters and Pairs) Let T ∈
{TF,TM}. We shall apply a subscript “TM” to [global or local] arithmetic data of

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 119
“T-pairs” to denote the result of applying the natural functor whose codomain is
the corresponding category of “TM-pairs” [i.e., the identity functor ifT = TM —
cf. Proposition 3.2]; we shall also use the subscript “TLG”i nas i m i l a rw a y .
(i) Write An⊚[Th⊚] for the category whose objects are data of the form
V⊚(Π)
def
=( Π↷V ⊚(Π),{Πv}v∈V(Π)non,{(X(Π,v),δell,v,κell,v)}v∈V(Π)arc)
[cf. the notation of Deﬁnition 5.1, (i)] forΠ∈Ob(EA⊚) and whose morphisms are
the morphisms induced by morphisms ofEA⊚. Then we havenatural functors
EA⊚ →An⊚[Th⊚]→Th⊚ →EA⊚
— where the ﬁrst arrow is the functor obtained by assigningOb(EA⊚) ∋ Π↦→
V⊚(Π); the second arrow is the functor obtained byforgetting the way in which
the global Galois-theater dataV⊚(Π)arose from Π; the third arrow is the natu-
ral functor of Deﬁnition 5.1, (vi); the compositeEA⊚ →EA⊚ of these arrows is
naturally isomorphic to theidentity functor — all of which areequivalences of
categories.
(ii) Let
(V⊚,M ⊚,{ρv}v∈V ,{(Πv ↷ Mv)}v∈V
non,{(Xv
κ
↶ Mv)}v∈V
arc)
be a globalT-pair [as in Deﬁnition 5.1, (v)]. Then there is aunique [hence, in par-
ticular, there exists afunctorial — relative toTh⊚
T — algorithm for constructing
the] isomorphism
μ ˆZ(M ⊚
TM)
∼
→μ ˆZ(Π)
[cf. Theorem 1.9, (b); Remark 1.10.1, (ii)] of Π-modules that is compatible
— relative to the restriction morphisms {ρv}v∈V
non — with the isomorphisms
μ ˆZ((Mv)TM)
∼
→μ ˆZ(Πv),f o rv∈V
non
, obtained by composing the isomorphisms of
Corollary 1.10, (c); Remark 3.2.1.
(iii) In the notation of (ii), there exists afunctorial [i.e., relative to Th⊚
T ]
algorithm for constructing theKummer map
M ⊚
TM
∼
→(M ⊚
TM)gp ∼
→M ⊚
TLG ↪→lim−→J
H1(J, μ ˆZ(M ⊚
TM))
∼
→lim−→J
H1(J, μ ˆZ(Π))
—w h e r e“J” ranges over the open subgroups ofΠ. In particular, the reference
isomorphisms ψ⊚,{ψv} of Deﬁnition 5.1, (v), areuniquely determinedby the
conditions stated in Deﬁnition 5.1, (v); in a similar vein, the isomorphismsφ⊚,
{φv} that appear in the deﬁnition of a “morphismφof globalT-pairs” in Deﬁnition
5.1, (v), areuniquely determined by φV⊚.
(iv) Write An⊚[Th⊚
T ] for the category whose objects are data of the form
M⊚
T (Π)
def
=( V⊚(Π),MT⊚(Π),{ρv(Π)}v∈V(Π),
{(Πv ↷ MT(Π,v))}v∈V(Π)non,{(X(Π,v)
κ
↶ MT(Π,v))}v∈V(Π)arc)

120 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
[cf. the notation of Deﬁnition 5.1, (v)] forΠ∈Ob(EA⊚) and whose morphisms are
the morphisms induced by morphisms ofEA⊚. Then we havenatural functors
EA⊚ →An⊚[Th⊚
T ]→Th⊚
T →EA⊚
— where the ﬁrst arrow is the functor obtained by assigningOb(EA⊚
T ) ∋ Π↦→
M⊚
T (Π); the second arrow is the functor obtained byforgetting the way in which
the globalT-pair dataM⊚
T (Π)arose fromΠ; the third arrow is the natural functor
of Deﬁnition 5.1, (vi); the composite EA⊚ →EA⊚ of these arrows is naturally
isomorphic to theidentityfunctor — all of which areequivalences of categories
that are[1-]compatible [in the evident sense] with the functors of (i).
(v) Write An⊚[Th✠] for the category whose objects are data of the form
V✠(Π)
def
=( Π,{V⊚(Π)}✠)
—w h e r eV⊚(Π)is as in (i); we use the notation “{−}✠” to denote the data obtained
by applying thepanalocalization functor Th⊚ →Th✠ of Deﬁnition 5.1, (iv) —
for Π∈Ob(EA⊚) and whose morphisms are the morphisms induced by morphisms
of EA⊚. Then we havenatural functors
EA⊚ →An⊚[Th✠]→Th✠
— where the ﬁrst arrow is the functor obtained by assigningOb(EA⊚) ∋ Π↦→
V✠(Π); the second arrow is the functor obtained byforgetting the way in which
the panalocal Galois-theater data{V⊚(Π)}✠ arose from Π. Here, the ﬁrst arrow
EA⊚ →An⊚[Th✠] is anequivalence of categories.
(vi) Write An⊚[Th✠
T ] for the category whose objects are data of the form
M✠
T (Π)
def
=( Π,{M⊚
T (Π)}✠)
—w h e r eM⊚
T (Π)is as in (iv); we use the notation “{−}✠” to denote the data
obtained by applying the panalocalization functor Th⊚ → Th✠ of Deﬁnition
5.1, (vi) — forΠ∈Ob(EA⊚) and whose morphisms are the morphisms induced by
morphisms ofEA⊚. Then we havenatural functors
EA⊚ →An⊚[Th✠
T ]→Th✠
T
— where the ﬁrst arrow is the functor obtained by assigningOb(EA⊚) ∋ Π↦→
M✠
T (Π); the second arrow is the functor obtained byforgetting the way in which
the panalocalT-pair data{M⊚
T (Π)}✠ arose fromΠ. Here, the ﬁrst arrowEA⊚ →
An⊚[Th✠
T ] is anequivalence of categories.
(vii) By replacing, in the deﬁnition of the objects of Th✠
T [cf. Deﬁnition
5.1, (iv)], the data in Orb(TG) (respectively, Orb(EA)) labeled by a(n) nonar-
chimedean (respectively,archimedean) valuation by [the result of applying(−)T
to] the data that constitutes the corresponding object ofOrb(Anab) [cf. Deﬁnition
3.1, (vi)] (respectively,Orb(LinHol) [cf. Deﬁnition 4.1, (v)]), we obtain acategory
An✠[Th✠
T ]

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 121
— i.e., whose morphisms are the morphisms induced by morphisms of Th✠ —
together withnatural functors
Th✠ →An✠[Th✠
T ]→Th✠
T →Th✠
— where the ﬁrst arrow is the functor arising from the deﬁnition ofAn✠[Th✠
T ];t h e
second arrow is the“forgetful functor”[cf. the “forgetful functors” of assertion
(ii) of Corollaries 3.6, 4.5]; the third arrow is the natural functor [cf. Deﬁnition
5.1, (vi)]; the compositeTh✠ →Th✠ of these arrows is naturally isomorphic to the
identity functor — all of which areequivalences of categories.
Proof. In light of Remark 5.1.1, assertion (i) is immediate from the deﬁnitions
and the results of§1, §2 [cf., especially, Theorem 1.9; Corollaries 1.10, 2.8] quoted
in these deﬁnitions. Assertion (ii) follows, for instance, by comparing the given
global T-pair with the globalT-pair dataM⊚
T (Π) of assertion (iv) via thereference
isomorphisms that appear in Deﬁnition 5.1, (v). In light of assertion (ii), assertion
(iii) is immediate from the deﬁnitions [cf. also Proposition 3.2, (ii), (iv), at the
nonarchimedeanv;“ κv”, the Kummer structure of “(Xv
κ
↶ Mv)” atarchimedean
v]. In light of assertion (iii), assertion (iv) is immediate from the deﬁnitions and the
results of§1, §2 [cf., especially, Theorem 1.9; Corollaries 1.10, 2.8] quoted in these
deﬁnitions. In a similar vein, assertions (v), (vi), and (vii) are immediate from the
deﬁnitions and the results quoted in these deﬁnitions [cf. also Proposition 3.2, (ii),
(iv), at the nonarchimedean v;“ κv”, the Kummer structure of “(Xv
κ
↶ Mv)” at
archimedeanv]. ⃝
Remark 5.2.1. Note thatneither of thecomposite functorsEA⊚ →Th✠, EA⊚ →
Th✠
T of Corollary 5.2, (v), (vi) is an equivalence of categories! Put another way,
there is no natural, functorial way to “glue together” the various local data of
a panalocal Galois-theater/T-pair so as so obtain a “global proﬁnite group” that
determines an object ofEA⊚.
Remark 5.2.2. By applying theequivalence EA⊚ ∼
→Th⊚ of Corollary 5.2, (i),
one may obtain afactorization
EA⊚ →Th⊚ →An⊚[Th⊚
T ]
ofthefunctor EA⊚ →An⊚[Th⊚
T ]ofCorollary5.2, (iv). Thus, weobtain equivalences
of categories Th⊚ ∼
→ An⊚[Th⊚
T ]
∼
→ Th⊚; the functor Th⊚ → An⊚[Th⊚
T ]m a yb e
thought of as a“global analogue” of the panalocal functorTh✠ → An✠[Th✠
T ]o f
Corollary 5.2, (vii).
Remark 5.2.3. A similar result to Corollary 5.2, (ii) [hence also similar re-
sults to Corollary 5.2, (iii), (iv)], may be obtained whenT = TLG,b yu s i n gt h e
archimedeanprimes, which are“immune”to the{±1}-indeterminacy of Proposi-
tion 3.3, (i). Indeed, in the notation of Deﬁnition 5.1, (iii), (v), ifv ∈V
arc
,t h e n
by combining “κell,vell” with the isomorphism “ψv” arising from thereference iso-
morphism of the global Galois-theater under consideration yields an inclusion of

122 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
ﬁelds kNF(Π)↪→AX(Π,vell)
∼
→AXv. On the other hand, by applying Corollary 1.10,
(c); Remark 1.10.3, (ii), at any of thenonarchimedean elements of V, it follows
that μ ˆZ(Π) may be related to the roots of unity ofkNF(Π), while therestriction
morphism at v of the globalT-pair under consideration, together with theKummer
structure at v, allow one to relate μ ˆZ(M ⊚) to the roots of unity ofAXv.T h u s ,
we obtain afunctorial algorithm [albeit somewhat more complicated than the al-
gorithm discussed in Corollary 5.2, (ii)] for constructing thenatural isomorphism
μ ˆZ(M ⊚)
∼
→μ ˆZ(Π).
Deﬁnition 5.3. Let T ∈{TF,TM,TLG}. We shall apply a subscript “TLG”
(respectively, “TCG”) to arithmetic data of “T-pairs” to denote the result of ap-
plying the natural functor whose codomain is the corresponding category of “TLG-
(respectively,TCG) pairs” [cf. Proposition 3.2; Corollary 5.2]. In the following, the
symbols
⊠, ⊞
are to be understood as shorthand for the terms“multiplicative”and “additive”,
respectively. Let
M⊚ def
=( V⊚,M ⊚,{ρv}v∈V ,{(Πv ↷ Mv)}v∈V
non,{(Xv
κ
↶ Mv)}v∈V
arc)
be a global T-pair [where V⊚ is as in Deﬁnition 5.1, (iii)]. Thus,M⊚ is equipped
with anatural Aut(Π)-action [cf. Corollary 5.2, (iv); Remark 5.2.3]. In the follow-
ing, we shall use a superscript proﬁnite group to denote the sub-object ofinvariants
with respect to that proﬁnite group; ifv∈V
def
= V/Aut(Π), then we shall writeMv
for the arithmetic data of the [orbi-]MLF-Galois/Aut-holomorphicT-pair indexed
byv of thepanalocalT-pairdetermined byM⊚,a n dΠv for the [orbi-]decomposition
group ofv.
(i) Suppose thatT = TLG.T h e na⊠-line bundleL⊠ onM⊚ is deﬁned to be
a collection of data
(L⊠[⊚]; {τ[v]∈L⊠[v]TV}v∈V )
—w h e r eL⊠[⊚]i sa n(M ⊚)Π-torsor equipped with an Out(Π)-action that is com-
patible with the natural Out(Π)-action on (M ⊚)Π and, moreover, factors through
the quotient Out(Π)↠ Im(Out(Π)→Out(Π/Δ)); for eachv∈V,
τ[v]∈L⊠[v]TV
is a trivialization of the torsorL⊠[v]TV over (MΠv
v )TV
def
= MΠv
v /(MΠv
v )TCG deter-
mined by theMΠv
v -torsorL⊠[v] obtained fromL⊠[⊚] viaρv,f o rv∈V lying overv
—suchthatanyelementof L⊠[⊚]determines[byrestriction]theelementof L⊠[v]TV
given byτ[v], forall but ﬁnitely manyv∈V. [Here, we note that the “[topological]
value group” (MΠv
v )TV is equipped with a naturalordering [which may be used to
deﬁne its topology] and is∼= Z if v∈Vnon and ∼= R if v∈Varc; moreover the nat-
ural ordering on (MΠv
v )TV determines a natural ordering onL⊠[v]TV.] Amorphism
of ⊠-line bundleson M⊚
ζ:L⊠
1 →L⊠
2

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 123
is deﬁned to be an Out(Π)-equivariant isomorphismζ[⊚]: L⊠
1 [⊚]
∼
→L⊠
2 [⊚] between
the respective (M ⊚)Π-torsors such that eachv∈V induces an isomorphismζ[v]TV :
L⊠
1 [v]TV
∼
→L⊠
2 [v]TV that mapsτ1[v]t oa ne l e m e n to fL⊠
2 [v]TV that is≤τ2[v]. Write
Th⊚⊠
T [M⊚]
for thecategoryof ⊠-line bundles onM⊚ and morphisms of⊠-line bundles onM⊚.
If φ: M⊚
1 →M⊚
2
is a morphism of global T-pairs, then there is anatural pull-
back functorφ∗: Th⊚⊠
T [M⊚
2 ] →Th⊚⊠
T [M⊚
1 ]. In particular, the various categories
Th⊚⊠
T [M⊚] together form aﬁbered category
Th⊚⊠
T →Th⊚
T
over Th⊚
T , whose ﬁbers are the categoriesTh⊚⊠
T [M⊚]. Finally, we observe that one
may generalize these deﬁnitions to the case of arbitraryT ∈{TF,TM,TLG} by
applying the subscript “TLG”, where necessary.
(ii) Suppose thatT = TF.W r i t eOM ⊚ for thering of integersof the ﬁeldM ⊚.
Then an ⊞-line bundleL⊞ on M⊚ is deﬁned to be a collection of data
(L⊞[⊚]; {|−|L⊞[v]}v∈Varc)
—w h e r eL⊞[⊚]i sa rank one projectiveOΠ
M ⊚-module equipped with an Out(Π)-
action that is compatible with the natural Out(Π)-action on (M ⊚)Π and, moreover,
factors through the quotient Out(Π)↠ Im(Out(Π)→Out(Π/Δ)); for eachv ∈
Varc,
|−|L⊞[v]
is aHermitian metricon theMv-vector spaceL⊞[v] obtained fromL⊞[⊚]⊗(M ⊚)Π
via ρv,f o rv ∈V lying over v. [Here, we recall that Mv is an [orbi-]complex
archimedean ﬁeld.] In this situation, we shall also writeL⊞[v] for theMΠv
v -vector
space obtained from L⊞[⊚]⊗(M ⊚)Π via ρv,f o rv ∈V lying over v ∈Vnon.I n
particular, theOΠ
M ⊚-module OΠ
M ⊚, equipped with its usual Hermitian metrics at
elements ofVarc, determines an⊞-line bundle which we shall refer to as thetrivial
⊞-line bundle.A morphism of ⊞-line bundleson M⊚
ζ:L⊞
1 →L⊞
2
is deﬁned to be anonzero Out(Π)-equivariant morphism ofOΠ
M ⊚-modules ζ[⊚]:
L⊞
1 [⊚] →L ⊞
2 [⊚] such that for each v ∈Varc, the induced isomorphism ζ[v]:
L⊞
1 [v]
∼
→L⊞
2 [v] mapsintegralelements [i.e., elements of norm≤1] with respect to
|−|L⊞
1 [v] to integralelements with respect to|−|L⊞
2 [v].W r i t e
Th⊚⊞
T [M⊚]
for thecategoryof ⊞-line bundles onM⊚ and morphisms of⊞-line bundles onM⊚.
If φ: M⊚
1 →M⊚
2
is a morphism of global T-pairs, then there is anatural pull-
back functorφ∗: Th⊚⊞
T [M⊚
2 ] →Th⊚⊞
T [M⊚
1 ]. In particular, the various categories
Th⊚⊞
T [M⊚] “glue together” to form aﬁbered category
Th⊚⊞
T →Th⊚
T

124 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
over Th⊚
T , whose ﬁbers are the categoriesTh⊚⊞
T [M⊚]. Finally, the assignment [in
the notation of the above discussion]
L⊞[⊚]↦→
(
the (M ⊚
TLG)Π-torsor of nonzero sections ofL⊞[⊚]⊗(M ⊚)Π
)
determines [in an evident fashion] anequivalence of categories
Th⊚⊞
T
∼
→Th⊚⊠
T
over Th⊚
T , i.e., an“equivalence of ⊠-a n d⊞-line bundles”.
(iii) Let ⊡ ∈{⊠, ⊞};i f ⊡ = ⊞, then assume that T = TF. Then observe
that theautomorphism groupof any object ofTh⊚⊡
T [M⊚] is naturally isomorphic
to the ﬁnite abelian groupμQ/Z(M ⊚
TLG)Aut(Π). To avoid various problems arising
from these automorphisms, it is often useful to work with“coarsiﬁed versions”of
the categories introduced in (i), (ii), as follows. Write
Th⊚|⊡|
T [M⊚]
for the [small,i d-rigid!] category whose objects areisomorphism classesof objects
of Th⊚⊡
T [M⊚] and whose morphisms areμQ/Z(M ⊚
TLG)Aut(Π)-orbits of morphisms of
Th⊚⊡
T [M⊚]. Thus, by allowing “M⊚” to vary, we obtain aﬁbered category
Th⊚|⊡|
T →Th⊚
T
over Th⊚
T , whose ﬁbers are the categoriesTh⊚|⊡|
T [M⊚]. Finally, the equivalence of
categories of (ii) determines anequivalence of categoriesTh⊚|⊞|
T
∼
→Th⊚|⊠|
T .
Remark 5.3.1. In the notation of Deﬁnition 5.3, (iii), one may deﬁne — in the
style of Corollary 5.2, (iv) — acategory An⊚[Th⊚
T ,|⊡|] whose objects are data of
the form
M⊚|⊡|
T (Π)
def
=( M⊚
T (Π), Th⊚|⊡|
T [M⊚
T [Π]])
for Π∈Ob(EA⊚) and whose morphisms are the morphisms induced by morphisms
of EA⊚. Here, we think of the datum “Th⊚|⊡|
T [M⊚
T [Π]]” as an object of the category
whose objects are small categories with trivial automorphism groups and whose
morphisms are contravariant functors. Then, just as in Corollary 5.2, (iv), one
obtains a sequence ofnatural functors
EA⊚ →An⊚[Th⊚
T ,|⊡|]→An⊚[Th⊚
T ]→Th⊚
T →EA⊚
— where the ﬁrst arrow is the functor obtained by assigning Ob(EA⊚
T ) ∋ Π↦→
M⊚|⊡|
T (Π) — all of which areequivalences of categories.
Deﬁnition 5.4. Let T∈{TF,TM}, •∈{⊚, ✠}.
(i) IfZ is anelliptically admissiblehyperbolic orbicurve over an algebraic clo-
sure ofQ, then we shall refer to a hyperbolic orbicurveX as in Deﬁnition 5.1, (ii),

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 125
as geometrically isomorphic to Z if [in the notation ofloc. cit.] there exists an
isomorphism of schemesXF
∼= Z.W r i t e
EA⊚[Z]⊆EA⊚
for the full subcategorydetermined by the proﬁnite groups isomorphic to ΠX for
some X as in Deﬁnition 5.1, (i), that is geometrically isomorphic toZ. This full
subcategory determines, in an evident fashion,full subcategories
Th•[Z]⊆Th•; Th•
T[Z]⊆Th•
T
—aswellasfullsubcategoriesofthe “An⊚[−]” versionsofthesecategoriesdiscussed
in Corollary 5.2 and the“⊠-, ⊞-line bundle versions”discussed in Remark 5.3.1
[cf. also the“measure-theoretic versions”discussed in Remark 5.9.1 below].
(ii) By applying the functors “logT,T” of Proposition 3.2, (v); Proposition 4.2,
(ii), to the various local data of a panalocal T-pair,w eo b t a i napanalocal log-
Frobenius functor
log✠
T,T : Th✠
T →Th✠
T
which isnaturally isomorphic to the identity functor, hence, in particular, anequiv-
alence of categories. Note that the construction underlying this functor leaves the
underlying panalocal Galois-theaterunchanged, i.e., log✠
T,T “lies over”Th✠.N o w
suppose that
M⊚ def
=( V⊚,M ⊚,{ρv}v∈V ,{(Πv ↷ Mv)}v∈V
non,{(Xv
κ
↶ Mv)}v∈V
arc)
is a global T-pair [where V⊚ is as in Deﬁnition 5.1, (iii)]. Note that the various
restriction morphismsρv determine a Π-equivariant embedding
M ⊚ ↪→
∏
v∈V
MT⊚
v
of M ⊚ into a certain product of local data. Thus, by applying the functors “logT,T”
of Proposition 3.2, (v); Proposition 4.2, (ii), to the variouslocal dataof M⊚ [i.e.,
more precisely: the data,other than the{ρv},t h a ti sindexed byv∈V], we obtain
a “local log-Frobenius functorlogv
T,T” on the portion of a globalT-pair constituted
by this local data which is naturally isomorphic to the identity functor.M o r e -
over, bycomposingthis natural isomorphismto the identity functor with the above
embeddingof M ⊚,w eo b t a i nanew Π-equivariant embedding
M ⊚ ↪→
∏
v∈V
logv
T,T(MT⊚
v )
of M ⊚ into the product [as above] that arises from theoutput “logv
T,T(MT⊚
v )” of
logv
T,T. In particular, by taking theimage of this new embeddingto be the global
data∈Ob(T⊚) [i.e., the “M⊚”] of anew global T-pair whose local data is given by
applying logv
T,T to the local data ofM⊚,w eo b t a i naglobal log-Frobenius functor
log⊚
T,T : Th⊚
T →Th⊚
T

126 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
which isnaturally isomorphic to the identity functor, hence, in particular, anequiv-
alence of categories. Moreover, the construction underlying this functor leaves the
underlying global Galois-theaterunchanged, i.e., log⊚
T,T “lies over”Th⊚. In the fol-
lowing discussion, we shall often denote [by abuse of notation] therestriction of
log•
T,T to the categories “(−)[Z]” bylog•
T,T. Note that if one restricts to the cat-
egories “(−)[Z]”, then the set “V/Aut(Π)” has a meaning which isindependent
of the choice of a particular objectof one of these categories [cf. the discussion of
Deﬁnition 5.1, (ii)]. In the following, let usﬁx a v∈V
def
= V/Aut(Π).
(iii) Consider, in the notation of Deﬁnition 3.1, (iv), thecommutative diagram
of natural maps
O×
k ↪→ k
×
↪→ k ...space-link
⏐⏐↓shell
⏐⏐↓
post-log... k∼ id
−→k∼ ↪→ (k
×
)pf
— where we recall thatk∼ def
=( O×
k )pf — a diagram which determines anoriented
graph ⃗Γlog
non [i.e., whose vertices and oriented edges correspond, respectively, to the
objects and arrows of the above diagram]; write⃗Γ⋉
non (respectively, ⃗Γ⋊
non) for the
oriented subgraph of⃗Γlog
non obtained by removing theupper right-handarrow “↪→k”
(respectively, thelower left-hand arrow “k∼ id
−→”) and⃗Γ×
non for theintersection of
⃗Γ⋉
non, ⃗Γ⋊
non. Let us refer to thelower left-hand vertex of⃗Γlog
non [i.e., the ﬁrst “k∼”]
as thepost-log vertex and to the other vertices of⃗Γlog
non as pre-log vertices; also we
shall refer to theupper right-handvertex of⃗Γlog
non [i.e., “k”] as thespace-linkvertex.
Here, we wish to think of thepre-log copy of “k∼” as an object [i.e., “(O×
k )pf”]
formed from k
×
and of the post-log copy of “k∼”a st h e“new ﬁeld”— i.e., the
new copy of the space-link vertex “k” — obtained by applying thelog-Frobenius
functor. Observe that theentire diagram⃗Γlog
non may be considered as a diagram in
the categoryTS, whereas the diagram⃗Γ⋉
non may be considered either as a diagram
in the categoryTS or as a diagram in the categoryTS⊞ [i.e., relative to theadditive
topological group structure of the ﬁeldk∼]. Writepk for theresidue characteristic
of k; setp∗
k
def
= pk if pk is odd and p∗
k
def
= p2
k if pk = 2. Then since [as is well-known]
the pk-adic logarithmdetermines abijection 1+ p∗
k ·Ok
∼
→p∗
k ·Ok, it follows that
OΠk
k∼ ⊆I
def
=( p∗
k)−1 ·I ∗ ⊆ (k∼)Πk
— where the superscript “Πk” denotes the submodule of Galois-invariants, and we
write I∗ for the image of O×
k =( O×
k )Πk ⊆O×
k via the left-hand vertical arrow
of the above diagram, i.e., in essence, the compact submodule constituted by the
pre-log-shell discussed in Deﬁnition 3.1, (iv). We shall refer toI as thelog-shell of
⃗Γ×
non and to the left-hand vertical arrow of the above diagram as theshell-arrow.I n
fact, ifk is absolutely unramiﬁedand pk is odd,t h e nw eh a v ea nequalityOΠk
k∼ =I
[cf. Remark 5.4.2 below].
(iv) Next, let us suppose thatv∈Vnon; recall the categoriesCMLF-sB
TS⊞ ,CMLF-sB
TS
of Deﬁnition 3.1, (iii). Thus, we have natural functorsCMLF-sB
TS⊞ →CMLF-sB
TS →TG.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 127
Let us write
N ⊞
v
def
=O r b (CMLF-sB
TS⊞ )×Orb(TG),v Th•[Z]; Nv
def
=O r b (CMLF-sB
TS )×Orb(TG),v Th•[Z]
—w h e r et h e“,v” in the ﬁbered product is to be understood as referring to the
natural functor Th•[Z]→Orb(TG) given by the assignment “V•↦→Πv” [cf. Deﬁ-
nition 5.1, (iv), (b)]. Thus, we havenatural functorsN ⊞
v →Nv →Th•[Z]. Next,
in the notation of (iii), let us set⃗Γlog
v
def
= ⃗Γlog
non, ⃗Γ×
v
def
= ⃗Γ×
non, ⃗Γ⋉
v
def
= ⃗Γ⋉
non, ⃗Γ⋊
v
def
= ⃗Γ⋊
non.
Then for each vertexνof ⃗Γ×
v , by assigning to “k”o r“O⊿
k ” [i.e., depending on
the choice ofT∈{TF,TM}] the object at the vertexνof the diagram of (iii), we
obtain anatural functorCMLF-sB
T →CMLF-sB
TS⊞ , hence by considering the portion of
the panalocal or globalT-pair under consideration that is indexed byv or v ∈V
lying overv,a natural functorλ⊞
v,ν: Th•
T[Z]→N⊞
v . In a similar vein, ifνis either
the space-linkor thepost-logvertex of⃗Γlog
v ,t h e nb ya s s i g n i n gt o“k”o r“O⊿
k ”t h e
underlying additive topological groupof the ﬁeld “k”[ c f .t h efunctorial algorithms
of Corollary 1.10, as applied in Proposition 3.2, (iii)], we obtain anatural functor
CMLF-sB
T →CMLF-sB
TS⊞ , hence by considering the portion of the panalocal or global
T-pair under consideration that is indexed byv or v ∈V lying overv,a natural
functor λ⊞
v,ν: Th•
T[Z]→N⊞
v . Thus, in summary, we obtainnatural functors
λ⊞
v,ν: Th•
T[Z]→N⊞
v ; λv,ν: Th•
T[Z]→Nv
— where the latter functor is obtained by composing the former functor with the
natural functorN ⊞
v →Nv — that “lie over”Th•[Z], for eachvertex νof ⃗Γlog
v .
(v) Consider, in the notation of Deﬁnition 4.1, (iv), thecommutative diagram
of natural maps
post-log... k∼ id
−→k∼ shell
−→k× ↪→ k ...space-link
— a diagram which determines an oriented graph ⃗Γlog
arc [i.e., whose vertices and
oriented edges correspond, respectively, to the objects and arrows of the above
diagram]; write⃗Γ⋉
arc (respectively,⃗Γ⋊
arc) for the oriented subgraph of⃗Γlog
arc obtained
by removing the arrow “↪→k”o nt h eright (respectively, the arrow “k∼ id
−→”o n
the left)a n d⃗Γ×
arc for the intersection of ⃗Γ⋉
arc, ⃗Γ⋊
arc. Let us refer to the vertex of
⃗Γlog
arc given by the ﬁrst “k∼”a st h epost-logvertex and to the other vertices of⃗Γlog
arc
as pre-log vertices; also we shall refer to the vertex of⃗Γlog
arc given by “k”a st h e
space-link vertex. Here, we wish to think of thepre-log copy of “k∼” as an object
formed from k× and of the post-log copy of “k∼”a st h e“new ﬁeld”— i.e., the
new copy of the space-link vertex “k” — obtained by applying thelog-Frobenius
functor. Observe that theentire diagram⃗Γlog
arc may be considered as a diagram in
the categoryTH, whereas the diagram⃗Γ⋉
arc may be considered either as a diagram
in the categoryTH or as a diagram inTH⊞ [i.e., relative to theadditive topological
group structure of the ﬁeldk∼]. Note that it follows from well-known properties of
the [complex] logarithmthat
Ok∼ = 1
π·I ⊆ I
def
= O×
k∼ ·I ∗ ⊆ k∼

128 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
—w h e r ew ew ew r i t eI∗ for the uniquely determined“line segment”[i.e., more
precisely: closure of a connected pre-compact open subset of a one-parameter sub-
group] ofk∼ which ispreserved by multiplication by±1 and whose endpoints diﬀer
by a generator of Ker(k∼ ↠ k×). Thus, I∗maps bijectively, except for the end-
points of the line segment, to thepre-log-shell discussed in Deﬁnition 4.1, (iv). We
shall refer toI as thelog-shell of ⃗Γ×
arc and to the arrowk∼ ↠ k× as theshell-arrow.
Also, we observe thatI may be constructed as theclosure of the union of the im-
ages ofI∗via theﬁnite order automorphismsof the Aut-holomorphic groupk∼;i n
particular, theformation ofI fromI∗depends only on thestructure ofk∼ as an
object ofTH⊞.
(vi) Next, let us suppose thatv ∈Varc; recall the categoriesChol
TH⊞, Chol
TH of
Deﬁnition 4.1, (iii). Thus, we have natural functorsChol
TH⊞ →Chol
TH →EA.L e tu s
write
N ⊞
v
def
=O r b (Chol
TH⊞)×Orb(EA),v Th•[Z]; Nv
def
=O r b (Chol
TH)×Orb(EA),v Th•[Z]
—w h e r et h e“,v” in the ﬁbered product is to be understood as referring to thenat-
ural functorTh•[Z]→Orb(EA) given by the assignment “V•↦→Xv” [cf. Deﬁnition
5.1, (iv), (c)]. Thus, we havenatural functorsN ⊞
v →Nv →Th•[Z]. Next, in the
notation of (v), let us set⃗Γlog
v
def
= ⃗Γlog
arc, ⃗Γ×
v
def
= ⃗Γ×
arc, ⃗Γ⋉
v
def
= ⃗Γ⋉
arc, ⃗Γ⋊
v
def
= ⃗Γ⋊
arc.T h e nf o r
each vertexνof ⃗Γ×
v ,b ya s s i g n i n gt o“k”o r“O⊿
k ” [i.e., depending on the choice of
T∈{TF,TM}] the object at the vertexνof the diagram of (v), we obtain a natural
functor Chol
T →Chol
TH⊞, hence by considering the portion of the panalocal or global
or T-pair under consideration that is indexed byv or v∈V lying overv,a natural
functor λ⊞
v,ν: Th•
T[Z] →N ⊞
v . In a similar vein, ifνis either thespace-link or the
post-log vertex of⃗Γlog
v ,t h e nb ya s s i g n i n gt o“k”o r“O⊿
k ”t h eunderlying additive
topological groupof the ﬁeld “k”[ c f .t h efunctorial algorithmsof Corollary 2.7, as
applied in Proposition 4.2, (ii)], we obtain anatural functorChol
T →Chol
TH⊞, hence by
considering the portion of the panalocal or globalT-pair under consideration that
is indexed byv or v∈V lying overv,a natural functorλ⊞
v,ν: Th•
T[Z]→N⊞
v .T h u s ,
in summary, we obtainnatural functors
λ⊞
v,ν: Th•
T[Z]→N⊞
v ; λv,ν: Th•
T[Z]→Nv
— where the latter functor is obtained by composing the former functor with the
natural functorN ⊞
v →Nv — that “lie over”Th•[Z], for eachvertex νof ⃗Γlog
v .
(vii) Finally, in the notation of (iv) (respectively, (vi)) forv ∈Vnon (respec-
tively, v ∈Varc): For eachedge ϵ of ⃗Γ⋉
v (respectively, ⃗Γlog
v ) running from avertex
ν1 to avertex ν2, the arrow in the diagram of (iii) (respectively, (v)) corresponding
to ϵ determines anatural transformation
ι⊞
v,ϵ : λ⊞
v,ν1 ◦Λν1 →λ⊞
v,ν2 (respectively, ιv,ϵ : λv,ν1 ◦Λν1 →λv,ν2)
—w h e r e ,f o re a c hpre-logvertex νof ⃗Γlog
v ,w et a k eΛνto be theidentity functoron
Th•
T[Z]; for thepost-logvertex νof ⃗Γlog
v ,w et a k eΛνto be thelog-Frobenius functor
log•
T,T : Th•
T[Z]→Th•
T[Z].

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 129
Remark 5.4.1. Note that thediagrams of Deﬁnition 5.4, (iii), (v), [hence also
the natural transformationsof Deﬁnition 5.4, (vii)]cannot be extended toglobal
number ﬁelds! Indeed, this observation is, in essence, a reﬂection of the fact that
the variouslogarithms that may be deﬁned at the various completions of a number
ﬁeld do not induce maps from, say, the group of units of the number ﬁeld to the
number ﬁeld!
Remark 5.4.2. Note that in the context of Deﬁnition 5.4, (iii), whenk is not
absolutely unramiﬁed,t h e“gap”betweenOΠk
k∼ and I may be bounded in terms of
the ramiﬁcation indexof k over Qpk. We leave the routine details to the interested
reader.
Remark 5.4.3. T h ei n c l u s i o n s“OΠk
k∼ ⊆I”, “Ok∼ ⊆I” of Deﬁnition 5.4, (iii), (v),
may be thought of as inclusions, within thelog-shellI, of the variouslocalizationsof
thetrivial ⊞-line bundleof Deﬁnition 5.3, (ii) — an⊞-line bundle whose structure is
determined by theglobal ring of integers[i.e., “OM ⊚” in the notation of Deﬁnition
5.3, (ii)], equipped its naturalmetrics at the archimedean primes. That is to say,
the deﬁnition of the trivial⊞-line bundle involves, in an essential way, not just the
additive [i.e., “⊞”] structure of the global ring of integers, but also themultiplicative
[i.e., “⊠”] structure of the global ring of integers.
Next, we consider the followingglobal/panalocal analogueof Corollaries 3.6,
4.5.
Corollary 5.5. (Global and Panalocal Mono-anabelian Log-Frobenius
Compatibility) Let Z be an elliptically admissible hyperbolic orbicurve over
an algebraic closure ofQ,w i t hﬁeld of moduli Fmod [cf. Deﬁnition 5.1, (ii)];
T ∈{TF,TM}; •∈{⊚, ✠}.S e t X
def
= Th•
T[Z], E• def
= Th•[Z]. Consider the
diagram of categoriesD•
... X
log
−→ X
log
−→ X ...
... id⋎+1 ↘
⏐⏐↓id⋎ ↙ id⋎−1 ...
X
... λ⊞
v′ ↙ ... ↙
⏐⏐↓...
⏐⏐↓λ⊞
v ↘ ... ↘ λ⊞
v′ ...
... N ⊞
v′ N ⊞
v N ⊞
v′′ ...
...
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓ ...
... Nv′ Nv Nv′′ ...
... ↘
⏐⏐↓ ↙ ...
E•
⏐⏐↓κAn•
An•[X]

130 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
⏐⏐
↓
E
•
— where we use the notation “log” for the evident restriction of the arrows “log•
T,T”
of Deﬁnition 5.4, (ii); for positive integers n ≤7, we shall denote by D•
≤n the
subdiagram of categories of D•determined by theﬁrst n [of the seven]rows
of D•; we writeL for the countably ordered set determined [cf.§0] by theinﬁnite
linear oriented graph⃗Γopp
D•
≤1
[so the elements ofL correspond to vertices of the
ﬁrst row ofD•]a n d
L† def
= L ∪{□}
for the ordered set obtained by appending toL a formal symbol □ [which we think
of as corresponding to the unique vertex of thesecond row ofD•] such that□ < ⋎,
for all ⋎ ∈L; id⋎ denotes the identity functor at the vertex⋎ ∈L; the vertices
of the third and fourth rows of D• are indexed by the elementsv′,v,v ′′,... of
the set of valuations V(Fmod) of Fmod; the arrows from thesecond row to the
categoryN ⊞
v in thethird row are given by the collection of functorsλ⊞
v
def
= {λ⊞
v,ν}ν
of Deﬁnition 5.4, (iv), (vi), whereνranges over thepre-log vertices of⃗Γlog
v [or,
alternatively, over all the vertices of⃗Γlog
v , subject to the proviso that weidentify
the functors associated to thespace-link and post-log vertices]; the arrows from
the third to fourth and from thefourth to ﬁfth rows are thenatural functors
N ⊞
v →Nv →E•of Deﬁnition 5.4, (iv), (vi); the arrows from theﬁfth to sixth
and from thesixth to seventhrows are thenatural equivalences of categories
E• ∼
→An•[X]
∼
→E•, the ﬁrst of which we shall denote byκAn• , of Corollary 5.2,
(i), (iv), (vii) [cf. also Remark 5.2.2], restricted to “[Z]”; we shall apply “[−]”t o
the names of arrows appearing inD•to denote thepath of length 1 associated to
the arrow. Also, let us write
φAn• : An•[X]
∼
→X
for the equivalence of categories given by the“forgetful functor”of Corollary
5.2, (iv), (vii), restricted to “[Z]”,πAn• : X→ An•[X] for the quasi-inverse for
φAn• given by the composite of the natural projection functorX→E •with κAn• :
E•→ An•[X],a n dηAn• : φAn• ◦πAn•
∼
→idX for the isomorphism that exhibits
φAn• , πAn• as quasi-inverses to one another. Then:
(i) Forn =5 ,6,7, D•
≤n admits a natural structure ofcore onD•
≤n−1. That is
to say, loosely speaking,E•, An•[X] “form cores” of the functors inD. If, moreover,
•= ⊚, then one obtains a natural structure ofcore onD•by appending to the ﬁnal
row ofD•the natural arrowE•→EA⊚[Z].
(ii) The“forgetful functor”φAn• gives rise to atelecore structure TAn•
on D•
≤5, whose underlying diagram of categories we denote byDAn• , by appending
to D•
≤6 telecore edges
An•[X]
... φ⋎+1 ↙
⏐⏐↓φ⋎ ↘ φ⋎−1 ...
... X
log
−→ X
log
−→ X ...

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 131
An•[X]
φ□
−→ X
from thecore An•[X] to the various copies ofX in D•
≤2 given by copies ofφAn• ,
w h i c hw ed e n o t eb yφ⋏,f o r⋏ ∈L†. That is to say, loosely speaking, φAn• de-
termines a telecore structure onD•
≤5. Finally, for each ⋏ ∈L†, let us write[β0
⋏]
for the path on ⃗ΓDAn• of length 0 at ⋏ and [β1
⋏] for some [cf. the coricity of
(i)!] path on ⃗ΓDAn• of length∈{5,6} [i.e., depending on whether or not⋏ = □]
that starts from ⋏, descends via some path of length∈{4,5} to the core vertex
“An•[X]”, and returns to⋏ via the telecore edgeφ⋏. Then the collection of natural
transformations
{η□⋎,η−1
□⋎,η⋏,η−1
⋏ }⋎∈L,⋏∈L†
— where we writeη□⋎ for the identity natural transformation from the arrowφ□ :
An•[X]→X to the composite arrowid⋎ ◦φ⋎ : An•[X]→X and
η⋏ :(DAn• )[β1
⋏]
∼
→(DAn• )[β0
⋏]
for the isomorphism arising fromηAn• — generate acontact structureHAn• on
the telecoreTAn• .
(iii) The natural transformations [cf. Deﬁnition 5.4, (vii)]
ι⊞
v,ϵ : λ⊞
v,ν1 ◦Λν1 →λ⊞
v,ν2 (respectively,ιv,ϵ : λv,ν1 ◦Λν1 →λv,ν2)
—w h e r ev ∈V(Fmod); ϵ is an edge of ⃗Γ⋉
v (respectively, ⃗Γlog
v ) running from a
vertex ν1 to a vertex ν2;i f ν1 is a pre-log vertex, then we interpret the domain
and codomain of ι⊞
v,ϵ (respectively, ιv,ϵ) as the arrows associated to the paths of
length 1 (respectively,2) from the second to third (respectively, fourth) rows ofD•
determined byv and ν1, ν2;i fν1 is apost-log vertex, then we interpret thedomain
of ι⊞
v,ϵ (respectively,ιv,ϵ) as the arrow associated to the path of length3 (respectively,
4) from the ﬁrst to the third (respectively, fourth) rows ofD•determined byv, ν1,
and the condition that the initial length2 portion of the path be a path of the form
[id⋎]◦[log] [for ⋎∈L], and we interpret thecodomain of ι⊞
v,ϵ (respectively,ιv,ϵ)
as the arrow associated to the path of length2 (respectively, 3) from the ﬁrst to
the third (respectively, fourth) rows ofD•determined by v, ν2, and the condition
that the initial length1 portion of the path be a path of the form[id⋎+1] [for the
same ⋎ ∈L] — belong to afamily of homotopies on D•
≤3 (respectively,D•
≤4)
that determines on the portion ofD•
≤3 (respectively,D•
≤4) indexed byv a structure
of observable Slog⊞ (respectively, Slog)o nD•
≤2 (respectively, the portion ofD•
≤3
indexed byv). Moreover, the families of homotopies that constituteSlog and Slog⊞
are compatible with one another as well as with the families of homotopies that
constitute thecore and telecore structures of (i), (ii).
(iv) The diagram of categoriesD•
≤2 doesnot admit a structure ofcore onD•
≤1
which [i.e., whose constituent family of homotopies] iscompatible with [the con-
stituent family of homotopies of] theobservables Slog, Slog⊞ of (iii). Moreover,
the telecore structure TAn• of (ii), thecontact structureHAn• of (ii), and the
observables Slog, Slog⊞ of (iii) arenot simultaneously compatible.
(v) The unique vertex □ of the second row ofD• is a nexus of ⃗Γ•
D.M o r e -
over, D•is totally □-rigid, and thenatural action of Z on the inﬁnite linear

132 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
oriented graph⃗ΓD•
≤1
extends to an action ofZ on D•by nexus-classes of self-
equivalencesofD•. Finally, the self-equivalences in these nexus-classes arecom-
patible with thefamilies of homotopiesthat constitute thecores and observ-
ables of (i), (iii); these self-equivalences also extend naturally [cf. the technique of
extension applied in Deﬁnition 3.5, (vi)] to the diagram of categories [cf. Deﬁnition
3.5, (iv), (a)] that constitutes thetelecore of (ii), in a fashion that iscompatible
with both the family of homotopies that constitutes this telecore structure [cf.
Deﬁnition 3.5, (iv), (b)] and thecontact structureHAn• of (ii).
(vi) There is a naturalpanalocalization morphism of diagrams of categories
D⊚ →D✠
[cf. the panalocalization functors of Deﬁnition 5.1, (iv), (vi)] that lies over the
evident isomorphism of oriented graphs ⃗Γ⊚
D
∼
→⃗Γ✠
D and is compatible with
the cores of (i), thetelecore and contact structures of (ii), theobservables
of (iii), and theZ-actions of (v).
Proof. Assertions (i), (ii) are immediate from the deﬁnitions — cf. also the proofs
of Corollary 3.6, (i), (ii); Corollary 4.5, (i), (ii). Next, we consider assertion (iii).
The data arising from applying the collection of functorsλv
def
= {λv,ν}νto the data
arising from id⋎,a s ⋎ ranges over the elements ofL, yields adiagram of copies of
⃗Γlog
v indexed by elements ofL
... ⊩ (⃗Γlog
v )⋎+1 ⊩ (⃗Γlog
v )⋎ ⊩ (⃗Γlog
v )⋎−1 ⊩ ...
—w h e r et h es y m b o l“⊩” denotes the result ofgluing (⃗Γlog
v )⋎+1 onto (⃗Γlog
v )⋎ by
identifying the post-log vertex of (⃗Γlog
v )⋎+1 with the space-link vertex of (⃗Γlog
v )⋎.
Now the existence of afamily of homotopiesas asserted follows, in a routine fashion,
from the fact that the above diagram iscommutative [i.e., one does not obtain any
pairs ofdistinct maps by traveling along distinct co-verticial pairs of paths of the
diagram] — cf. the relationship of the diagrams
... ←↩ k
×
⋎+1 → (k
×
⋎+1)pf ←↩ k
×
⋎ → (k
×
⋎)pf ←↩. . .
... ←↩k ×
⋎+1 ↞ k∼
⋎+1 ←↩k ×
⋎ ↞ k∼
⋎ ←↩. . .
of Remarks 3.6.1, (i); 4.5.1, (i), to the proofs of assertion (iii) of Corollaries 3.6,
4.5; we leave the routine details [which are entirely similar to the proofs of assertion
(iii) of Corollaries 3.6, 4.5] to the reader. Finally, thecompatibilityof the resulting
family of homotopies with the families of homotopies that constitute the core and
telecore structures of (i), (ii) is immediate from the deﬁnitions. This completes the
proof of assertion (iii).
Next, we consider assertion (iv). Recall that the proofs of the incompatibil-
ity assertions of assertion (iv) of Corollaries 3.6, 4.5 amount, in essence, to the
incompatibility of the introduction of asingle model that maps isomorphically to
various copies of the model indexed by elements ofL in the diagrams of Remarks
3.6.1, (i); 4.5.1, (i). In the present situation, the incompatibility assertions of as-
sertion (iv) of the present Corollaries 5.5 amount, in an entirely similar fashion, to

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 133
the incompatibilityof the introduction of asingle model(⃗Γlog
v )□ of ⃗Γlog
v that maps
isomorphically
(⃗Γlog
v )□
... ↙↓↘ ...
... ⊩ (⃗Γlog
v )⋎+1 ⊩ (⃗Γlog
v )⋎ ⊩ (⃗Γlog
v )⋎−1 ⊩ ...
to each copy (⃗Γlog
v )⋎ that appears in the diagram that was used in the proof of
assertion (iii). We leave the routine details [which are entirely similar to the proofs
of assertion (iv) of Corollaries 3.6, 4.5] to the reader. This completes the proof of
assertion (iv).
Next, we consider assertion (v). The fact that□ is anexus of ⃗Γ•
D is immediate
from the deﬁnitions. When•= ⊚,t h etotal □-rigidity of D•follows immediately
from theequivalence of categoriesTh⊚
T
∼
→EA⊚ of Corollary 5.2, (iv), together with
theslimness of the proﬁnite groups that appear as objects ofEA⊚ [cf., e.g., [Mzk20],
Proposition 2.3, (ii)]. When•= ✠,t h etotal □-rigidity of D•follows, in light of
the “Kummer theory”of Propositions 3.2, (iv); 4.2, (i), from the fact that the
orbi-objectsthat appear in the deﬁnition of apanalocal Galois-theaterare deﬁned in
such a way as toeliminate all the automorphisms[cf. Deﬁnition 5.1, (iv), (b), (c)].
The remainder of assertion (v) is immediate from the deﬁnitions and constructions
made thus far. This completes the proof of assertion (v). Finally, we observe that
assertion (vi) is immediate from the deﬁnitions and constructions made thus far.
⃝
Remark 5.5.1. The “general formal content”of the remarks following Corollaries
3.6, 3.7 applies to the situation discussed in Corollary 5.5, as well. We leave the
routine details of translating these remarks into the language of the situation of
Corollary 5.5 to the interested reader.
Remark 5.5.2. Note that it does not appear realistic to attempt to construct
a theory of“geometric panalocalization”with respect to the variousclosed points
of the hyperbolic orbicurveover an MLF under consideration [cf. the discussion of
Remarks 1.11.5; 3.7.7, (ii)]. Indeed, the decomposition groups of such closed points
[which are either isomorphic to the absolute Galois group of an MLF or an extension
of such an absolute Galois group by a copy ofˆZ(1)] do not satisfy an appropriate
analogue of the crucialmono-anabelian result Corollary 1.10 [hence, in particular,
d on o tl e a dt oas i t u a t i o ni nw h i c hboth of the two combinatorial dimensions of the
absolute Galois group of an MLF under consideration arerigidiﬁed —c f .R e m a r k
1.9.4].
Deﬁnition 5.6.
(i) Recall thecategoriesTG, TM,a n dTS of Deﬁnition 3.1, (i), (iii). Write
TG⊢ ⊆TG

134 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
for thesubcategorygiven by the proﬁnite groups isomorphic to theabsolute Galois
group of an MLFand open injections of proﬁnite groups, and
TGcs ⊆Orb(TG)
forthe full subcategorydeterminedbythe[ “coarsiﬁed”]objectsofOrb( TG)obtained
by considering an objectG∈Ob(TG) up to its group of automorphisms AutTG(G).
Write
TM⊢
for the category whoseobjects(C,−→C) consist of a topological monoidC isomorphic
to O⊿
C and a topological submonoid−→C ⊆C [necessarily isomorphic toR≥0]s u c h
that the natural inclusionsC× ↪→C [where C×, which is necessarily isomorphic to
S1, denotes the topological submonoid ofinvertible elements], −→C↪ →C determine
an isomorphism
C× ×−→C
∼
→C
of topological monoids, and whosemorphisms (C1,−→C1) →(C2,−→C2) are isomor-
phisms of topological monoidsC1
∼
→C2 that induce isomorphisms−→C1
∼
→−→C2.I f
G∈Ob(TG), then let us write
Lie(G)
for the associated group germ — i.e., the associated group pro-object ofTS de-
termined by the neighborhoods of the identity element — and, whenG is abelian,
Lie±(G) for the orbi-group germ obtained by working withLie(G)u pt o“{±1}”.
Write
TB⊞
for the category whoseobjects(B,B ′,B′′,β) consist of a two-dimensional connected
topological Lie groupB equipped with two one-parameter subgroupsB′,B′′ ⊆B
that determine an isomorphism
B′ ×B′′ ∼
→B
of topological groups, together with an isomorphismβ: Lie±(B′)
∼
→Lie±(B′′), and
whose morphisms (B1,B′
1,B′′
1,β1)→(B2,B′
2,B′′
2,β2) are the surjective homomor-
phisms B1 →B2 of topological groups that arecompatiblewith theB′
i, B′′
i , βi for
i =1 ,2. WriteTB for the category oforientable topological orbisurfaces[i.e., which
are topological surfaces over the complement, in the “coarse space” associated to
the orbisurface, of somediscrete closed subset] and local isomorphisms between such
orbisurfaces. Thus, we obtain natural“forgetful functors”
TM⊢ →TM; TB⊞→TB
determined by the assignments (C,−→C)↦→C,( B,B ′,B′′,β)↦→B, as well as natural
“decomposition functors”
decTM⊢ : TM⊢ →TG×TGcs; decTB⊞ : TB⊞→TG×TGcs
determinedbytheassignments( C,−→C)↦→(C×,(−→C
gp
)cs), (B,B ′,B′′,β)↦→(B′,(B′′)cs)
[where “gp” denotes thegroupiﬁcation of a monoid; “cs” denotes the result of con-
sidering a topological group up to its group of automorphisms].

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 135
(ii) We shall refer to as amono-analytic Galois-theaterany collection of data
W⊢ def
=( W ⊚,{(Gw,|Π|w)}w∈Wnon,{(Gw,|X|w)}w∈Warc)
—w h e r eW ⊚ is a set that admits a decomposition as a disjoint unionW ⊚ =
{⊚W} ⋃ Wnon ⋃Warc ⊇W
def
= Wnon ⋃Warc;f o re a c hw ∈Wnon, Gw ∈
Ob(Orb(TG⊢)), and |Π|w is an isomorphism class of pro-objects of the category
TG;f o re a c hw∈Warc, Gw ∈Ob(Orb(TM⊢)), and|X|w is anisomorphism classof
EA — such that there exists apanalocal Galois-theater
V✠ def
=( V ⊚,{Πv}v∈Vnon,{Xv}v∈Varc)
[cf. the notation of Deﬁnition 5.1, (iv)] and anisomorphism of sets
ψW : V ⊚ ∼
→W ⊚
— which we shall refer to as areference isomorphismfor W⊢ — that satisﬁes the
following conditions: (a) ψW maps ⊚V ↦→ ⊚W, Vnon ∼
→Wnon, Varc ∼
→Warc;
(b) for each v ∈Vnon mapping to w ∈Wnon, Gw is isomorphic to the [group-
theoretically characterizable— cf. Remark 1.9.2] quotient Πv ↠ Gv determined
by the absolute Galois group of the base ﬁeld, and the class |Π|w contains the
pro-object of TG determined by the projective system of open subgroups of Πv
arising from open subgroups ofGv; (c) for eachv∈Varc mapping tow∈Warc, Xv
belongs to the class|X|w,a n dGw is isomorphic to the object ofTM⊢ determined
by (O⊿
AXv
,O⊿
AXv
⋂R>0). A morphism of mono-analytic Galois-theaters
φ:( W ⊚
1 ,{((G1)w1,|Π|w1)}w1∈Wnon
1 ,{((G1)w1,|X|w1)}w1∈Warc
1 )
→(W ⊚
2 ,{((G2)w2,|Π|w2)}w2∈Wnon
2 ,{((G2)w2,|X|w2)}w2∈Warc
2 )
is deﬁned to consist of a bijection of setsφW : W ⊚
1
∼
→W ⊚
2 that induces bijec-
tions Wnon
1
∼
→Wnon
2 , Warc
1
∼
→Warc
2 that are compatible with the isomorphism
classes |Π|wi, |X|wi [for i =1 ,2], together with open injections of [orbi-]proﬁnite
groups (G1)w1 ↪→(G2)w2 [where Wnon
1 ∋ w1 ↦→w2 ∈Wnon
2 ], and isomorphisms
(G1)w1
∼
→(G2)w2 [where Warc
1 ∋ w1 ↦→w2 ∈Warc
2 ]. Write Th⊢ for the category
of mono-analytic Galois-theatersand morphisms of mono-analytic Galois-theaters.
Thus, if Z is an elliptically admissible hyperbolic orbicurve over an algebraic clo-
sure of Q,t h e nw eh a v eafull subcategory Th⊢[Z] ⊆Th⊢, together with natural
“mono-analyticization functors”
Th✠ →Th⊢; Th✠[Z]→Th⊢[Z]
— which areessentially surjective.
(iii) Next, let usﬁx a mono-analytic Galois-theaterW⊢ as in (ii), together with
a w∈Wnon. Recall the categoriesCMLF⊢
TS⊞ , CMLF⊢
TS of Deﬁnition 3.1, (iii). Thus, we
have a[1-]commutative diagramof natural functors
CMLF-sB
TS⊞ −→ CMLF-sB
TS −→TGsB
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
CMLF⊢
TS⊞ −→ CMLF⊢
TS −→TG⊢

136 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
— in which the vertical arrows are“mono-analyticization functors”[cf. the mono-
analyticization functors of (ii); the construction implicit in (ii), (b)]; the arrows
CMLF-sB
TS →TGsB,CMLF⊢
TS →TG⊢ are the natural projection functors. Let us write
N⊢⊞
w
def
=O r b (CMLF⊢
TS⊞ )×Orb(TG⊢),w Th⊢[Z]
N⊢
w
def
=O r b (CMLF⊢
TS )×Orb(TG⊢),w Th⊢[Z]
—w h e r et h e“,w” in the ﬁbered product is to be understood as referring to the
natural functor Th⊢[Z] →Orb(TG⊢) given by the assignment “W⊢ ↦→Gw”[ c f .
(ii)]. Thus, we havenatural functorsN⊢⊞
w →N⊢
w →Th⊢[Z].
(iv) Next, let usﬁx a mono-analytic Galois-theaterW⊢ as in (ii), together with
a w∈Warc. Recall the categoriesChol
TH⊞, Chol
TH of Deﬁnition 4.1, (iii). Write
Chol⊢
TB⊞
for the category whoseobjects are triples (G,M,κM), whereG∈Ob(TM⊢), M ∈
Ob(TB⊞), and κM : decTB⊞(M) ↠ decTM⊢(G) — which we shall refer to as the
Kummer structureo ft h eo b j e c t—i sapair of surjective homomorphismsof TG,
TGcs, and whose morphisms φ:( G1,M1,κM1) →(G2,M2,κM2) consist of an
isomorphism φG : G1
∼
→G2 of TM⊢ and a morphismφM : M1 →M2 of TB⊞ that
are compatiblewith κM1, κM2;w r i t eChol⊢
TB
def
= TM⊢ ×TB.N e x t :
Suppose that (Xell
κ
↶ Mk) ∈Ob(Chol
TH⊞) [cf. Deﬁnition 4.1, (i)]. Recall
that theKummer structureof (Xell
κ
↶ Mk) consists of an Aut-holomorphic
homomorphism fromMk to an isomorph of “C× (∼= S1 ×R>0)”; observe
that the Aut-holomorphic automorphisms ofLie(C×) of order4 determine
an isomorphismLie±(S1×{1})
∼
→Lie±({1}×R>0). Thus, by pulling back
to Mk, via theKummer structureof (Xell
κ
↶ Mk), the two one-parameter
subgroups “S1 ×{ 1},{1}× R>0 ⊆C×”, we obtain, in a natural way, an
object ofChol⊢
TB⊞.
In particular, we obtain a[1-]commutative diagramof natural functors
Chol
TH⊞ −→ Chol
TH −→ EA
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
C
hol⊢
TB⊞ −→ Chol⊢
TB −→TM⊢
— in which the vertical arrows are“mono-analyticization functors”[cf. the mono-
analyticization functors of (ii); the construction implicit in (ii), (c)]; the arrows
Chol
TH →EA, Chol⊢
TB →TM⊢ are the natural projection functors. Let us write
N⊢⊞
w
def
=O r b (Chol⊢
TB⊞)×Orb(TM⊢),w Th⊢[Z]
N⊢
w
def
=O r b (Chol⊢
TB )×Orb(TM⊢),w Th⊢[Z]
—w h e r et h e“,w” in the ﬁbered product is to be understood as referring to the
natural functor Th⊢[Z] →Orb(TM⊢) given by the assignment “W⊢ ↦→Gw”[ c f .
(ii)]. Thus, we havenatural functorsN⊢⊞
w →N⊢
w →Th⊢[Z].

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 137
Remark 5.6.1.
(i) Observe that amonoid M may be thought of as a[1-]categoryCM consisting
of a single object whose monoid of endomorphisms is given byM. In a similar vein,
a ring R, whose underlying additive group we denote byR⊞, may be thought of
as a 2-category consisting of the single 1-categoryCR⊞, together with the functors
CR⊞ →CR⊞ arising from left multiplication by elements ofR.
(ii) The constructions of (i) suggest that whereas amonoid may be thought
of as a mathematical object with“one combinatorial dimension”,a ring should be
thought of as a mathematical object with“two combinatorial dimensions”.M o r e -
over, in the case of an MLFk, these two combinatorial dimensions may be thought
of as corresponding to the two cohomological dimensions of the absolute Galois
group ofk, while in the case of a CAFk, these two combinatorial dimensions may
be thought of as corresponding to thetwo real or topological dimensionsof k.T h u s ,
from this point of view, it is natural to think ofring structures as corresponding
to holomorphic structures— i.e., both ring and holomorphic structures are based
on a certain complicated “intertwining of the underlying two combinatorial
dimensions”. So far, in the theory of§1, §2, §3, and§4 of the present paper, the
emphasis has been on“holomorphic structures”, i.e., of restricting ourselves to sit-
uations in which this “complicated intertwining” isrigid. By contrast, the various
ideas introduced in Deﬁnition 5.6 relate to the issue ofdisabling this rigidity—
i.e., of“passing fromone holomorphic totwo underlying combinatorial/topological
dimensions”— an operation which, as was discussed in Remarks 1.9.4, 2.7.3, has
the eﬀect of leavingonly one of the two combinatorial dimensionsrigid. Put an-
other way, this corresponds to the operation of “passing from rings to monoids”;
this is the principal motivation for the term“mono-analyticization”.
The following result is elementary and well-known.
Proposition 5.7. (Local Volumes) Let k be either amixed-characteristic
nonarchimedean local ﬁeld or acomplex archimedean ﬁeld.
(i) Suppose thatk is nonarchimedean [cf. Deﬁnition 3.1, (i)]. Write mk ⊆
Ok for the maximal ideal ofOk and M(k) for the set ofcompact open subsets
of k.T h e n :
(a) There exists aunique map
μk : M(k)→R>0
that satisﬁes the following properties: (1)additivity, i.e., μk(A ⋃B)=
μk(A)+ μk(B),f o rA,B ∈M(k) such thatA ⋂B =∅;( 2 )⊞-translation
invariance, i.e.,μk(A+x)= μk(A),f o rA∈M(k), x∈k;( 3 )normal-
ization, i.e., μk(Ok)=1 . We shall refer toμk(−) as thevolume on k.
Also, we shall writeμlog
k (−)
def
= log(μk(−)) [where log denotes the natural
logarithm R>0 →R]a n dr e f e rt oμlog
k (−) as thelog-volume on k.I ft h e
residue ﬁeld of k is of cardinalitypf,w h e r ep is a prime number andf
a positive integer, then, forn∈Z, μlog
k (mn
k)= −f·n·log(p).

138 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(b) Let x ∈k×;s e t˙μk(x)
def
= μk(x·O k), ˙μlog
k (x)
def
= log(˙μk(x)). Then for
A∈M(k), we haveμlog
k (x·A)= μlog
k (A)+˙μlog
k (x); in particular, ifx∈O×
k ,
then μlog
k (x·A)= μlog
k (A).
(c) Write logk :O×
k →k for the [p-adic] logarithm on k.L e tA⊆O×
k be
an open subset such thatlogk induces a bijection A
∼
→logk(A).T h e n
μlog
k (A)= μlog
k (logk(A)).
(ii) Suppose thatk is archimedean [cf. Deﬁnition 4.1, (i)]; thus, we have a
natural decomposition k× ∼= O×
k × R>0,w h e r eO×
k
∼= S1, and we note that the
projection k× →R>0 extends to a continuous mapprR : k→R. Write
M(k) (respectively, ˘M(k))
for the set of nonemptycompact subsetsA⊆k (respectively,A⊆k×) such that
A projects to a [compact] subset ofR (respectively,O×
k ) which is the closure of its
interior inR (respectively,O×
k ). Then:
(a) The standard R-valued absolute value onk determines a Riemannian
metric [ a sw e lla saK ¨ahler metric] onk that restricts to Riemannian met-
rics onO×
k
∼
→O×
k ×{1} ↪→k× and R>0
∼
→{1}× R>0 ↪→k×. Integrating
these metrics over the projection ofA ∈M(k) (respectively, A ∈˘M(k))
to R (respectively,O×
k ) [i.e., “computing the length ofA relative to these
metrics”] yields a map
μk : M(k)→R>0 (respectively, ˘μk : ˘M(k)→R>0)
that satisﬁes the following properties: (1)additivity, i.e., μk(A ⋃B)=
μk(A)+ μk(B) (respectively, ˘μk(A ⋃B)=˘μk(A)+˘μk(B)), for A,B ∈
M(k) (respectively, A,B ∈˘M(k)) whose projections to R (respectively,
O×
k ) are disjoint; (2) normalization, i.e., μk(Ok)=1 (respectively,
˘μk(O×
k )=2 π). We shall refer toμk(−) (respectively, ˘μk(−))a st h era-
dial volume(respectively,angular volume)o nk. Also, we shall write
μlog
k (−)
def
= log(μk(−)) (respectively, ˘μlog
k (−)
def
= log(˘μk(−)))a n dr e f e rt o
μlog
k (−) (respectively, ˘μlog
k (−))a st h eradial log-volume (respectively,
angular log-volume)o nk.
(b) Let x ∈k×;s e t˙μk(x)
def
= μk(x·O k), ˙μlog
k (x)
def
= log(˙μk(x)). Then for
A∈M(k) (respectively,A∈˘M(k)), we haveμlog
k (x·A)= μlog
k (A)+˙μlog
k (x)
(respectively, ˘μlog
k (x·A)=˘μlog
k (A)); in particular, ifx∈O×
k ,t h e nμlog
k (x·
A)= μlog
k (A).
(c) Write expk : k→k× for theexponential map onk.L e tA∈M(k) be
such that expk(A) ⊆O×
k , and, moreover, the mapsprR and expk induce
bijections A
∼
→prR(A), A
∼
→expk(A).T h e nμlog
k (A)=˘μlog
k (expk(A)).

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 139
Proof. First, we consider assertion (i). Part (a) follows immediately from well-
known properties of theHaar measureon the locally compact[additive] group k.
Part (b) follows immediately from theuniqueness portion of part (a). To verify
part (c) for arbitraryA, it suﬃces [by theadditivity property of μk(−)] to verify
part (c) forA of the formx+ mn
k for n a suﬃciently large positive integer,x∈O×
k .
But then logk determines a bijection x + mn
k
∼
→logk(x)+ mn
k, so the equality
μlog
k (A)= μlog
k (logk(A)) follows from the⊞-translation invarianceof μlog
k (−). This
completes the proof of assertion (i). Assertion (ii) follows immediately from well-
known properties of the geometry of the complex plane.⃝
Remark 5.7.1. The “log-compatibility”[i.e., part (c)] of Proposition 5.7, (i), (ii),
may be regarded as a sort of“integrated version”of the fact that the derivative of
the formal power series log(1 +X)= X + ... at X = 0 is equal to 1. Moreover,
the opposite directionsof the “arrows involved” [i.e., logarithm versus exponential]
in the nonarchimedean and archimedean cases is reminiscent of the discussion of
Remark 4.5.2.
Proposition 5.8. (Mono-analytic Reconstruction of Log-shells)
(i) LetGk be theabsolute Galois groupof anMLF k. Then there exists a
functorial [i.e., relative toTG⊢] “group-theoretic” algorithmfor constructing
the images of the embeddingsO⊿
k ↪→Gab
k , k× ↪→Gab
k of local class ﬁeld theory
[cf. [Mzk9], Proposition 1.2.1, (iii), (iv)]. Here, the asserted “functoriality” iscon-
travariantand induced by theVerlagerung, or transfer, map on abelianizations.
In particular, we obtain a functorial “group-theoretic” algorithm for reconstructing
the residue characteristic p [cf. [Mzk9], Proposition 1.2.1, (i)], the invariant
p∗[i.e., p if p is odd;p2 if p is even — cf. Deﬁnition 5.4, (iii)], thecardinality
pf of the residue ﬁeld of k [i.e., by adding1 to the cardinality of the prime-to-p
torsion of k×], the absolute degree [k : Qp] [i.e., as the dimension ofO×
k ⊗Qp
over Qp], the absolute ramiﬁcation index e =[ k : Qp]/f, and the orderpm of
the subgroup ofp-th power roots of unityof k×.
(ii) The algorithms of (i) yield afunctorial [i.e., relative toTG⊢] “group-
theoretic” algorithm“Ob(TG⊢) ∋ G ↦→⃗Γ×
non(G)” for constructing fromG the
⃗Γ×
non-diagram inCMLF⊢
TS⊞ [cf. §0]
O×
k (G) ↪→ k
×
(G)
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
k
∼(G) ↪→ (k
×
)pf(G)
determined by the diagram of Deﬁnition 5.4, (iii), hence also thelog-shellI(G)⊆
k∼(G) of ⃗Γ×
non(G).
(iii) The algorithms of (i) yield afunctorial [i.e., relative toTG⊢] “group-
theoretic” algorithm“Ob(TG⊢) ∋ G ↦→Rnon(G)” for constructing fromG the
topological group [which is isomorphic toR]
Rnon(G)
def
=( k
×
(G)/O×
k (G))∧

140 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
—w h e r e“∧” stands for the completion with respect to the order structure deter-
mined by the nonnegative elements, i.e., the image ofO⊿
k (G)/O×
k (G) — equipped
with a distinguished element, namely, the“Frobenius element”F(G)∈Rnon(G)
[cf. [Mzk9], Proposition 1.2.1, (iv)], which we think of as corresponding to the el-
ement fG ·log(pG)∈R,w h e r epG, fG are the invariants “p”, “f” of (i). Finally,
these algorithms also yield a functorial, “group-theoretic” algorithm for constructing
the log-volume map
μlog(G): M(k∼(G)G)→Rnon(G)
—w h e r e“M(−)” is as in Proposition 5.7, (i); the superscript “G” denotes the
submodule of G-invariants; if we writemG, eG, p∗
G for the invariants “m”, “e”,
“p∗” of (i), then one may think ofμlog(G) as being normalized via the formula
μlog(G)(I(G)) ={−1−mG/fG +eG ·log(p∗
G)/log(pG)}· F(G)
— determined by composing the mapμlog
k∼(G)G of Proposition 5.7, (i), (a), with the
isomorphism R
∼
→Rnon(G) given byfG·log(pG)↦→F(G). That is to say, “μlog(G)”
and “M(k∼(G)G)”a r ewell-deﬁned despite the fact one does not have an algorithm
for reconstructing the ﬁeld structure onk∼(G)G [i.e., unlike the situation discussed
in Proposition 5.7, (i)].
(iv) LetG =( C,−→C)∈Ob(TM⊢); writeC∼ →C× for the [pointed]universal
covering of C× [cf. the deﬁnition of “k∼ ↠ k×” in Deﬁnition 4.1, (i)]; thus, we
regardC∼ as a topological group [isomorphic toR]. Then the evident isomorphism
Lie±(C∼)∼= Lie±(C×) allows one to regardk∼(G)
def
= C∼×C∼, k×(G)
def
= C××C∼
as objects of TB⊞. Write Seg(G) for the equivalence classes of compact line
segments on C∼ [i.e., compact subsets which are either equal to the closure of a
connected open set or are of cardinality one], relative to the equivalence relation
determined by translation on C
∼. Then forming the union of two compact line
segments whose intersection is of cardinality one determines amonoid structure
on Seg(G) with respect to whichSeg(G)
∼
→R≥0. In particular, this monoid structure
determines a structure oftopological monoid on Seg(G).
(v) The constructions of (iv) yield afunctorial [i.e., relative toTM⊢] algo-
rithm “Ob(TM⊢) ∋ G ↦→⃗Γ×
arc(G)” for constructing fromG the ⃗Γ×
arc-diagram in
Chol⊢
TB⊞ [cf. §0]
k∼(G)= C∼×C∼ ↠ k×(G)= C× ×C∼
determined by the diagram of Deﬁnition 5.4, (v), hence also thelog-shell
I(G)
def
= {(a·x,b ·x) | x∈IC∼ ; a,b ∈R; a2 +b2 =1}⊆ k∼(G)
— where we writeIC∼ ⊆C∼ for the unique compact line segment onC∼ that is
invariant with respect to the action of±1 and, moreover, maps bijectively, except
for its endpoints, toC× —o f⃗Γ×
arc(G).

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 141
(vi) The constructions of (iv) yield afunctorial [i.e., relative to TM⊢] al-
gorithm “Ob(TM⊢) ∋ G ↦→Rarc(G)” for constructing fromG the topological
group [which is isomorphic toR]
Rarc(G)
def
=S e g (G)gp
equipped with a distinguished element, namely, the“Frobenius element”F(G)∈
Seg(G) ⊆Rarc(G) determined by a compact line segment that maps bijectively,
except for its endpoints, toC×; we shall think ofF(G) as corresponding to2π∈
R. Finally, these algorithms also yield a functorial, algorithm for constructing the
radial and angular log-volumemaps
μlog(G): M(k∼(G))→Rarc(G); ˘μlog(G): ˘M(k∼(G))→Rarc(G)
—w h e r e“M(−)”, “˘M(−)” are as in Proposition 5.7, (ii); if, in the style of the
deﬁnition ofI(G) in (v), we write∂IC∼ for the boundary [i.e., the two endpoints]
of IC∼ and
O×
k∼ (G)
def
= {(a·x,b ·x) | x∈∂IC∼ ; a,b ∈R; a2 +b2 = π−2}⊆ k∼(G)
[so one has a natural bijectionR>0 ×O ×
k∼ (G)
∼
→k∼(G)\{0}], then one may think
of μlog(G), ˘μlog(G) as being normalized via the formulas
μlog(G)(I(G)) = ˘μlog(G)(O×
k∼ (G))−log(2)·F(G)/2π= log(π)·F(G)/2π
— determined by composing the mapsμlog
k∼(G), ˘μlog
k∼(G) of Proposition 5.7, (ii), (a),
with the isomorphismR
∼
→Rarc(G) given by2π↦→F(G). That is to say, “μlog(G)”,
“˘μlog(G)”, “M(k∼(G))”, and “˘M(k∼(G))”a r ewell-deﬁned despite the fact one
does not have an algorithm for reconstructing the ﬁeld structure onk∼(G) [i.e.,
unlike the situation discussed in Proposition 5.7, (ii)].
(vii) LetZ be anelliptically admissible hyperbolic orbicurve over an alge-
braic closure of Q; V✠ ∈Ob(Th✠[Z]) [cf. the notation of Deﬁnition 5.1, (iv);
Deﬁnition 5.4, (i)];W⊢ ∈Ob(Th⊢[Z]) the mono-analyticization of V✠ [cf. the
notation of Deﬁnition 5.6, (ii)];w∈Wnon (respectively,w∈Warc). Write
An⊢[N⊢⊞
w ]
for the category whoseobjects consist of an object of Th⊢[Z], together with the
object of Orb(CMLF⊢
TS⊞ [⃗Γ×
non]) (respectively, Orb(Chol⊢
TB⊞[⃗Γ×
arc])) given by applying the
algorithm “G↦→⃗Γ×
non(G)” of (ii) (respectively, “G↦→⃗Γ×
arc(G)” of (v)) to the object
of Orb(TG⊢) (respectively,Orb(TM⊢)) obtained by projecting [atw — cf. Deﬁni-
tion 5.6, (ii)] the given object ofTh⊢[Z], and whosemorphisms are the morphisms
induced by Th⊢[Z]. Thus we obtain a naturalequivalence of categories
Th⊢[Z]
∼
→An⊢[N⊢⊞
w ]
together with a“forgetful functor”
ψAn⊢ ⊞
w,ν : An⊢[N⊢⊞
w ]→N⊢⊞
w

142 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
[cf. Deﬁnition 5.6, (iii), (iv)] for each vertex νof ⃗Γ×
w
def
= ⃗Γ×
non (respectively,
⃗Γ×
w
def
= ⃗Γ×
arc), and anatural transformation
ιAn⊢ ⊞
w,ϵ : ψAn⊢ ⊞
w,ν1 →ψAn⊢⊞
w,ν2
for each edgeϵ of ⃗Γ×
w running from avertex ν1 to avertex ν2. Finally, we shall
omit the symbol “⊞”from the above notation to denote the result of composing
the functors and natural transformations discussed above with the natural functor
N⊢⊞
w →N⊢
w; also, we shallreplace the symbol “An⊢” by the symbol “⊢”in
the superscripts of the above notation to denote the result of restricting the functors
and natural transformations discussed above toTh⊢[Z].
Proof. The various assertions of Proposition 5.8 are immediate from the deﬁnitions
and the references quoted in these deﬁnitions.⃝
Remark 5.8.1.
(i) One way to summarize thearchimedean portion of Proposition 5.8 is as
follows: Suppose that one starts with the[Aut-]holomorphic monoid given by an
isomorph ofO⊿
C [i.e., where one thinks of the [Aut-]holomorphic structure onO⊿
C as
consisting of a(n) [Aut-]holomorphic structure on (O⊿
C )gp = C×] arising as theO⊿
AX
forsome X∈Ob(EA). Theoperationof mono-analyticizationconsistsof“forgetting
the rigidiﬁcation of the [Aut-]holomorphic structure furnished byX” [cf. Remark
2.7.3]. Thus, applying the operation of mono-analyticization to an isomorph ofO⊿
C
yields the object ofTM⊢ consisting of an isomorph of thetopological monoidO⊿
C
equipped with the submonoid corresponding toO⊿
C ∩R>0,w h i c hi snon-rigid,i n
the sense that it is subject todilations [cf. Remark 2.7.3]. On the other hand:
From the point of view of the theory oflog-shells, one wishes to per-
form the operation ofmono-analyticization — i.e., of “forgetting the [Aut-
]holomorphic structure” — in such a way that onedoes not obliterate the
metric rigidity[i.e., the “applicability” of the theory of Proposition 5.7]
of the log-shells involved.
This is precisely what is achieved by the use of the categoryTB⊞ — cf., especially,
the construction of thenatural functorChol
TH⊞ →Chol⊢
TB⊞ in Deﬁnition 5.6, (iv); the
constructions of Proposition 5.8, (iv), (v), (vi). That is to say, the“metric rigidity”
of log-shells is preserved even after mono-analyticization by thinking of the “metric
rigidity” of theoriginal [Aut-]holomorphic O⊿
C as being constituted by
“the metric rigidity of S1 ∼= O×
C , together with the rotation automor-
phisms of Lie(C×) of order4”[cf. Deﬁnition 5.6, (iv)].
That is to say, this approach to describing “[Aut-]holomorphic metric rigidity” has
the advantange of being“immune to mono-analyticization”— cf. the construction
of k∼(G)a s“ C∼ × C∼” in Proposition 5.8, (iv). On the other hand, it has the

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 143
disadvantage that it isnot compatible[as one might expect from any sort of mono-
analyticization operation!] with preserving thecomplex archimedean ﬁeld structure
of “k∼”. That is to say, the two factors ofC∼ appearing in the product “C∼×C∼”
— which should correspond to theimaginary and real portions of such a complex
archimedean ﬁeld structure — may only be related to one anotherup to a{±1}
indeterminacy, an indeterminacy that has the eﬀect of obliterating the ring/ﬁeld
structure involved.
(ii) It is interesting to note that the discussion of thearchimedean situation
of (i) is strongly reminiscent of the nonarchimedean portion of Proposition 5.8,
which allows one to constructmetrically rigid log-shellswhich areimmune to
mono-analyticization, but only at the expense ofsacriﬁcing the ring/ﬁeld
structures involved.
Deﬁnition 5.9.
(i) By pulling back the variousfunctorial algorithmsof Proposition 5.8 deﬁned
on TG⊢, TM⊢ via themono-analyticization functorsTGsB →TG⊢, EA→TM⊢,w e
obtain functorial algorithmsdeﬁned onTGsB, EA. In particular, if, in the notation
of Deﬁnition 5.1, (iii) (respectively, Deﬁnition 5.1, (iv); Deﬁnition 5.6, (ii)),V⊚
(respectively,V✠; W⊢)i sa global (respectively, panalocal; mono-analytic) Galois-
theater,t h e nf o re a c hv∈V
def
= V/Aut(Π) (respectively,v∈V; v∈W), we obtain
— i.e., by applying thefunctorial algorithms“Rnon(−)”, “Rarc(−)” of Proposition
5.8, (iii), (vi) —[orbi-]topological groups[isomorphic toR]
Rv
equipped withdistinguished Frobenius elementsFv ∈Rv. Moreover, if we write⊚V
for the unique global element ofV ⊚ def
= V
⊚
/Aut(Π) (respectively,V ⊚; W ⊚), then
we obtain a(n)[orbi-]topological group[isomorphic toR]
R⊚V ⊆
∏
v
Rv
— where the product ranges overv ∈V (respectively, v ∈V; v ∈W)—o b t a i n e d
as the “graph”of the correspondences between theRv’s that relate theFv/(fv ·
log(pv)) [where “fv”, “pv”a r et h ei n v a r i a n t s“fG”, “pG” of Proposition 5.8, (iii)]
for nonarchimedeanv to theFv/2πfor archimedeanv.T h u s ,R⊚V is equipped with
a distinguished elementF⊚V ∈R⊚V [which we think of as corresponding to 1∈R],
and we havenatural isomorphisms of [orbi-]topological groupsR⊚V
∼
→Rv that map
F⊚V ↦→Fv/(fv ·log(pv)) fornonarchimedeanv and F⊚V ↦→Fv/2πfor archimedean
v [where we note thatdivision of elements of theabstract topological groupRv by a
positive real number iswell-deﬁned].
(ii) In the notation of Deﬁnition 5.1, (v) (respectively, Deﬁnition 5.1, (vi)),
let M⊚ (respectively, M✠)b ea global (respectively, panalocal) T-pair,f o rT ∈
{TF,TM}. In the non-resp’d case, writeV ⊚ def
= V
⊚
/Aut(Π). Then the various
log-volumes deﬁned in Proposition 5.7, (i), (ii), determine maps
{μlog
v : M(MΠv
v )→Rv}v∈V ; {˘μlog
v : ˘M(MΠv
v )→Rv}v∈Varc

144 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
—w h e r ew ew r i t eM(MΠv
v ), [when v ∈Varc] ˘M(MΠv
v = Mv) for the set of sub-
sets determined [via the reference isomorphisms “ψv” of Deﬁnition 5.1, (v); the
“forgetful functors”of Corollary 5.2, (iv), (vii)] by intersecting withMT(Π,v)Πv ⊆
kNF(Π,v)Πv the corresponding collection of subsets ofM(kNF(Π,v)Πv), [whenv∈
Varc] ˘M(k
×
NF(Π,v)Πv).
(iii) In the non-resp’d [i.e.,global] case of (ii), suppose further thatT = TF.
Then for any⊞-line bundleL⊞ on M⊚, one veriﬁes immediately that there exist
morphisms of ⊞-line bundles onM⊚
ζ:L⊞
1 →L⊞; ζ0 :L⊞
1 →L⊞
0
such that L⊞
0 is isomorphic to the trivial ⊞-line bundle. Thus, for each v ∈
V, we obtain isomorphisms of MΠv
v -vector spaces ζ[v]: L⊞
1 [v]
∼
→L ⊞[v], ζ0[v]:
L⊞
1 [v]
∼
→L ⊞
0 [v]. Moreover, by applying these isomorphisms, we obtain subsets
Sv ⊆L⊞
0 [v]f o re a c hv∈V as follows: Ifv∈Vnon, then we takeSv to be the subset
determined by the closure of the image [via the variousρv,f o rv∈V lying overv]
of L⊞[⊚]. If v ∈Varc, then we takeSv to be the subset determined by the set of
elements ofL⊞[v] for which|−|L⊞[v] ≤1. Now set
μlog
⊚ (L⊞)
def
=
∑
v∈Varc
2μlog
v (Sv)⊚/dmod
v +
∑
v∈Vnon
μlog
v (Sv)⊚/dmod
v ∈R⊚V
—w h e r edmod
v is as in Deﬁnition 5.1, (ii), forv ∈V ∼= V(Fmod); the superscript
“⊚” denotes the result of applying thenatural isomorphismsR⊚V
∼
→Rv of (i); we
note that the sum isﬁnite,s i n c eμlog
v (Sv) = 0 for all but ﬁnitely manyv ∈V.A s
is well-known [or easily veriﬁed!] fromelementary number theory— i.e., the so-
called “product formula”! — it follows immediately that [as the notation suggests]
“μlog
⊚ (L⊞)”depends only on the isomorphism class of L⊞ and, in particular, is
independent of the choice ofζ, ζ0. Finally, byapplyingthe equivalences of categories
of Deﬁnition 5.3, (ii), (iii), it follows immediately that we may extend theR⊚V -
valued function [on isomorphism classes of⊞-line bundles onM⊚]
μlog
⊚ (−)
to a function that is also deﬁned on isomorphism classes of⊠-line bundlesonM⊚,
for arbitraryT∈{TF,TM,TLG}.
Remark 5.9.1. Just as in Remark 5.3.1, one may deﬁne — in the style of
Corollary 5.2 — acategory An⊚[Th•
T,μ], where•∈{⊚, ✠}, whose objects are data
of the form
M•μ
T (Π)
def
=( M•
T(Π),
{(Rv,μlog
v (Πv)(−))}v∈Vnon,{(Rv,μlog
v (Xv)(−),˘μlog
v (Xv)(−))}v∈Varc)
— where the “(Πv)’s”, “(Xv)’s” preceding the “(−)’s” are to be understood as
denoting the log-volumes associated, as in Deﬁnition 5.9, (ii), to the various con-
stituent data ofM•
T(Π) — for Π∈Ob(EA⊚), and whose morphisms are the mor-
phisms induced by morphisms ofEA⊚. In a similar vein, by combining the data
that constitutes an object ofAn✠[Th✠
T ] with the data
{(Rv,μlog
v (Πv)(−))}v∈V ,{(Rv,μlog
v (Xv)(−),˘μlog
v (Xv)(−))}v∈Varc

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 145
— where the “(Πv)’s”, “(Xv)’s” preceding the “(−)’s” are to be understood as
denoting the log-volumes associated, as in Deﬁnition 5.9, (ii), to the various con-
stituent data of the original object ofAn✠[Th✠
T ] — and considering the morphisms
induced by morphisms ofTh✠, we obtain a categoryAn✠[Th✠
T ,μ]. Finally, by com-
bining the constructions of Deﬁnitions 5.3, 5.9; Remark 5.3.1, we obtain acategory
An⊚[Th⊚
T ,|⊡|,μ] whose objects are data of the form
M⊚|⊡|μ
T (Π)
def
=( M⊚|⊡|
T (Π),R⊚V ,
{μlog
v (Π)(−)⊚}v∈Vnon,{μlog
v (Π)(−)⊚,˘μlog
v (Π)(−)⊚}v∈Varc,μlog
⊚ (Π)(−))
— where the “(Π)’s” preceding the “(−)’s” are to be understood as denoting the
log-volumes associated, as in Deﬁnition 5.9, (ii), (iii), to the various constituent
data ofM⊚|⊡|
T (Π) — for Π∈Ob(EA⊚), and whose morphisms are the morphisms
induced by morphisms ofEA⊚. Then, just as in Corollary 5.2, Remark 5.3.1, one
obtains sequences ofnatural functors
EA⊚ →An⊚[Th•
T,μ]→An⊚[Th•
T]→Th•
T →Th•
Th✠ →An✠[Th✠
T ,μ]→An✠[Th✠
T ]→Th✠
T →Th✠
EA⊚ →An⊚[Th⊚
T ,|⊡|,μ]→An⊚[Th⊚
T ,|⊡|]→Th⊚
T →EA⊚
— where the ﬁrst arrows are the functors arising from the deﬁnitions of the cat-
egories “An⊚[−,μ]”, “An✠[−,μ]”; with theexception of the second to last arrow
o ft h eﬁ r s tl i n eo ft h ea b o v ed i s p l a yi nt h ec a s ew h e r e•= ✠, every arrow of the
above display is anequivalences of categories[cf. Corollary 5.2, (i), (iv), (v), (vii);
Remark 5.3.1].
Remark 5.9.2. The signiﬁcance of measuring [log-]volumes in units that belong
to the copies ofR determined by “Rnon(−)”, “Rarc(−)” lies in the fact that such
measurements may compared on both sides of the“log-wall”, as well as in a fashion
compatiblewiththeoperationof mono-analyticization[cf. thediscussionofRemark
3.7.7; Corollary 5.10, (ii), (iv), below].
We are now ready to state themain resultof the present§5 [and, indeed, of
the present paper!].
Corollary 5.10. (Fundamental Properties of Log-shells) In the notation
of Corollary 5.5; Proposition 5.8, (vii), write
E⊢ def
= Th⊢[Z]; An⊢[N⊢⊞]
def
=
∏
v∈V(Fmod)
An⊢[N⊢⊞
v ]
— where the product is a ﬁbered product of categories overE⊢ = Th⊢[Z]. Consider

146 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
the diagram of categoriesD⊢
... N⊢⊞
v′ N⊢⊞
v N⊢⊞
v′′ ...
...
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓ ...
... N
⊢
v′ N⊢
v N⊢
v′′ ...
... ↘
⏐⏐↓ ↙ ...
E⊢
⏐⏐↓
An⊢[N⊢⊞]
⏐⏐↓
E⊢
— where we regard the rows ofD⊢ as being indexed by the integers 3,4,5,6,7
[relative to which we shall use the notation “D⊢
≤n” — cf. Corollary 5.5]; the ar-
rows of D⊢
≤5 are those discussed in Deﬁnition 5.6, (iii), (iv); the arrows of the
rows numbered5,6,7 of D⊢ are the arrows deterimined by the equivalence of cat-
egories of Proposition 5.8, (vii). Note, moreover, that we have a naturalmono-
analyticization morphism [consisting of arrows between corresponding vertices
belonging to rows indexed by thesame integer!] of diagrams of categories
D•
≥3 →D⊢
[cf. Deﬁnition 5.4, (iv), (vi), as well as the discussion, involving panalocalization
and mono-analyticization functors, of Corollary 5.5, (vi); Deﬁnition 5.6, (ii), (iii),
(iv)] — where the subscript “≥3” refers to the portion involving the rows numbered
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and we take the arrowAn•[X]→An⊢[N⊢⊞] to be the arrow induced, via
the equivalence of categoriesκAn• of Corollary 5.5 and the equivalence of categories
of Proposition 5.8, (vii), by the mono-analyticization functorE•→E⊢; write
D•⊢
for the diagram of categories obtained by gluingD•,D⊢ via this mono-analyticization
morphism. We shall refer to the various isomorphisms between composites of func-
tors inherent in the deﬁnition of the mono-analyticization morphismD•
≥3 →D⊢
[e.g., the natural isomorphisms between the functors associated to the two length2
pathsN ⊞
v →N⊢⊞
v →N⊢
v , N ⊞
v →Nv →N⊢
v ,w h e r ev∈V(Fmod), in the third and
fourth rows ofD•⊢]a smono-analyticization homotopies. We shall refer to the
natural transformation “ι⊞
v,ϵ” of Corollary 5.5, (iii), as ashell-homotopy [at v]
if ϵ is a shell-arrow [cf. Deﬁnition 5.4, (iii), (v)]; we shall refer to “ι⊞
v,ϵ”a salog-
homotopy [at v] if the initial vertex ofϵ is a post-log vertex. Ifv ∈V(Fmod)non
(respectively,v∈V(Fmod)arc), then we shall refer to as a•-shell-container struc-
ture on an objectS ∈Ob(N ⊞
v ) the datum of an objectS′ ∈Ob(X) together with an
isomorphism S
∼
→λ⊞
v,ν(S′),w h e r eνis the terminal (respectively, initial) vertex of

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 147
the shell-arrow of⃗Γ×
v ; an object ofN ⊞
v equipped with a•-shell-container structure
will be referred to as a•-shell-container. Note that the shell-homotopies deter-
mine•-log-shells “I” [cf. Deﬁnition 5.4, (iii), (v)] inside the underlying object of
TS⊞ (respectively,TH⊞) determined by each•-shell-container. If v∈V(Fmod)non
(respectively, v ∈V(Fmod)arc), and S is an object ofN ⊞
v or N⊢⊞
v , then we shall
write SGal for the topological submodule ofGalois-invariantsof (respectively, the
topological submodule constituted by) the underlying object ofTS⊞ (respectively,
TH⊞ or TB⊞) determined byS.
(i) (Finite Log-volume)Let v∈V(Fmod)non (respectively,v∈V(Fmod)arc).
For each•-shell-container S ∈Ob(N ⊞
v ), SGal is equipped with a well-deﬁnedlog-
volume (respectively, well-deﬁnedradial and angular log-volumes) [cf. Deﬁni-
tion 5.9, (ii)] that depend(s) only on the•-shell-container structure ofS. Moreover,
the •-log-shell is contained inSGal and [relative to these log-volumes] is ofﬁnite
log-volume (respectively,ﬁnite radial log-volume).
(ii) (Log-Frobenius Compatibility of Log-volumes)For v, S as in (i),
the log-volume (respectively,radial log-volume), computed “at⋎∈L”, iscom-
patible [cf. part (c) of Proposition 5.7, (i), (ii)], relative to the relevant log-
homotopy,w i t ht h elog-volume (respectively,angular log-volume), computed
“at ⋎+1 ∈L”.
(iii) (Panalocalization) The log-volumes of (i), as well as the construction
of the•-log-shells from the variousshell-homotopies,a r ecompatible with the
panalocalization morphism D⊚ →D✠ of Corollary 5.5, (vi).
(iv) (Mono-analyticization) If v∈V(Fmod)non (respectively,v∈V(Fmod)arc),
then we shall refer to as a•⊢-shell-container structureon an objectS ∈Ob(N⊢⊞
v )
the datum of an objectS′ ∈Ob(X) together with an isomorphism fromS to the
image inN⊢⊞
v of λ⊞
v,ν(S′),w h e r eνis the terminal (respectively, initial) vertex of
the shell-arrow of⃗Γ×
v ; an object ofN⊢⊞
v equipped with a•⊢-shell-container struc-
ture will be referred to as a•⊢-shell-container. Note that the shell-homotopies
determine •⊢-log-shells “I” [cf. Deﬁnition 5.4, (iii), (v)] inside each•⊢-shell-
container, as well as a well-deﬁnedlog-volume (respectively, well-deﬁnedradial
and angular log-volumes)o nt h eGal-superscripted module associated to a•⊢-
shell-container [cf. (i)]. These •⊢-log-shells and log-volumes depend only on the
mono-analyticized data[i.e., roughly speaking, the data contained inD⊢], in the
following sense [cf., especially, (d)]:
(a) (Mono-analytic Cores)Forn =5 ,6,7,D•⊢
≤n admits a natural structure
of core on the subdiagram of categories ofD•⊢determined by the union
D•⊢
≤n−1
⋃D•
≤n — i.e., loosely speaking,E⊢, An⊢[N⊢⊞] “form cores” of the
functors inD•⊢.
(b) (Mono-analytic Telecores)As v ranges over the elements ofV(Fmod)
and νover the elements of⃗Γ×
v , the restrictions
φAn⊢ ⊞
v,ν : An⊢[N⊢⊞]→N⊢⊞
v
to An⊢[N⊢⊞] of the “forgetful functors” ψAn⊢ ⊞
v,ν of Proposition 5.8,
(vii), give rise to a telecore structure TAn⊢ on D•⊢
≤5
⋃D•
≤6, whose

148 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
underlying diagram of categories we denote by DAn⊢, by appending to
D•⊢
≤6 telecore edges corresponding to the arrowsφAn⊢ ⊞
v,ν from the core
An⊢[N⊢⊞] to the vertices of the row ofD⊢ indexed by the integer3.M o r e -
over, the respective family of homotopies ofTAn⊢ and the observablesSlog,
Slog⊞ of Corollary 5.5, (iii), arecompatible.
(c) (Mono-analytic Contact Structures) For v ∈V(Fmod), ν∈⃗Γ×
v ,
there is anatural isomorphism η⊢
v,ν from the composite functor deter-
mined by the pathγ1
v,ν [of length6]
X
λ⊞
v,ν
−→ N⊞
v −→ Nv −→ E•
⏐⏐↓
E⊢ −→An⊢[N⊢⊞]
φAn⊢ ⊞
v,ν
−→ N⊢⊞
v
on ⃗ΓDAn⊢ — where the ﬁrst three arrows lie inD•
≤5, the fourth arrow
arises from the mono-analyticization morphism D•
≥3 →D⊢, and the
ﬁfth arrow lies inD⊢ — to the composite functor determined by the path
γ0
v,ν [of length2]
X
λ⊞
v,ν
−→ N⊞
v −→ N⊢⊞
v
on ⃗ΓDAn⊢ . Moreover, the resultinghomotopies η⊢
v,ν, (η⊢
v,ν)−1, together
with the mono-analyticization homotopies and the homotopies on
DAn⊢ arising from the “ιAn⊢ ⊞
v,ϵ ” [cf. Proposition 5.8, (vii)], generate a
contact structureHAn⊢ on TAn⊢ that is compatible with the telecore
and contact structuresTAn• , HAn• of Corollary 5.5, (ii), as well as with
the homotopies of the observablesSlog, Slog⊞ of Corollary 5.5, (iii), that
arise from the “ι⊞
v,ϵ”, “ιv,ϵ” indexed byϵ∈⃗Γ×
v [not ⃗Γlog
v !].
(d) (Mono-analytic Log-shells) If v ∈V(Fmod)non (respectively, v ∈
V(Fmod)arc), then we shall refer to as a⊢-shell-container structure
on an objectS ∈Ob(N⊢⊞
v ) the datum of an objectS′ ∈Ob(An⊢[N⊢⊞]),
together with an isomorphism fromS
∼
→φAn⊢ ⊞
v,ν (S′),w h e r eνis the ter-
minal (respectively, initial) vertex of the shell-arrow of⃗Γ×
v ; an object of
N⊢⊞
v equipped with a⊢-shell-container structure will be referred to as a
⊢-shell-container. Note that the portion of the data that constitutes an
object of An⊢[N⊢⊞
v ] determined by the shell-arrow gives rise to a⊢-log-
shell “I”i n s i d ee a c h⊢-shell-container, as well as to alog-volumeon the
Gal-superscripted module associated to a⊢-shell-container [cf. Proposition
5.8, (ii), (iii), (v), (vi)]. Finally, every•⊢-shell-container structure on
an object ofN⊢⊞
v determines, by applying the isomorphismη⊢
v,ν of (c), a
corresponding⊢-shell-container structure on the object; this correspon-
dence between•⊢-, ⊢-shell-container structures is compatible with the
•⊢-, ⊢-log-shells, as well as with the variouslog-volumes, determined,
respectively, by these•⊢-, ⊢-shell-container structures.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 149
Proof. The various assertions of Corollary 5.10 are immediate from the deﬁnitions,
together with the references quoted in the statement of Corollary 5.10. Here, we
note that in thenonarchimedeanportion of part (c) of assertion (iv), in order to
construct the isomorphismsη⊢
v,ν, it is necessary to relate the construction of the
base ﬁeld as a subset ofabelianizations of various open subgroups of the Galois
group [cf. Proposition 5.8, (i)] to theKummer-theoretic construction of the base
ﬁeld as performed in Theorem 1.9, (e). This may be achieved by applying the
group-theoretic construction algorithmsof Corollary 1.10 — i.e., more precisely, by
combining the“fundamental class” natural isomorphismof Corollary 1.10, (a) [cf.
also the ﬁrst isomorphism of the display of Corollary 1.10, (b)], with thecyclotomic
natural isomorphismofCorollary1.10, (c)[cf. alsoRemark1.10.3, (ii)]. Putanother
way, this series of algorithms may be summarized as a “group-theoretic algorithm
for constructing thereciprocity map of local class ﬁeld theory”.⃝
Remark 5.10.1.
(i) Note that, in the notation of Corollary 5.10, (iv), (c), by pre-composing
η⊢
v,ν with thetelecorearrow φ□ : An•[X] →X of Corollary 5.5, (ii), and applying
the coricityof Corollary 5.5, (i), together with an appropriatemono-analyticization
homotopy, we obtain that one may think ofη⊢
v,ν as yielding a homotopy from the
path
An•[X] −→An⊢[N⊢⊞]
φAn⊢⊞
v,ν
−→ N⊢⊞
v
—w h i c hi ss o m e w h a tsimpler [hence perhaps easier to grasp intuitively] than the
domain path of the original homotopyη⊢
v,ν— to the path
An•[X]
φ□
−→ X
λ⊞
v,ν
−→ N⊞
v −→ N⊢⊞
v
[i.e., obtained by simply pre-composingγ0
v,νwith φ□].
(ii) Note that the isomorphism of (i) between the two composites of functors
An•[X] →N ⊢⊞
v depends only on “Galois-theoretic/Aut-holomorphic data”.I n
p a r t i c u l a r ,o n em a yc o n s t r u c t—i nt h es t y l eo fR e m a r k s5 . 3 . 1 ,5 . 9 . 1—ac a t e g o r y
“An•[X,η⊢]” whoseobjects consist of the data of objects ofAn•[X], together with
the algorithms used to construct the various homotopies of (i) arising fromη⊢
v,ν
[i.e., associated to the variousv∈V(Fmod), ν∈⃗Γ×
v ], and whosemorphisms are the
morphisms induced by morphisms ofAn•[X]. That is to say, objects ofAn•[X,η⊢]
consist of objects of An•[X], together with “group-theoretic algorithms encoding
the reciprocity law of local class ﬁeld theoryat the nonarchimedean primes and the
archimedean analogue of these algorithmsat the archimedean primes”. Moreover,
the “forgetful functor”
An•[X,η⊢]
∼
→An•[X]
determines a natural equivalence of categories. Finally, one veriﬁes immediately
that one may replace “An•[X]” by “An•[X,η⊢]” in Corollaries 5.5 and 5.10 with-
out aﬀecting the validity of their content — e.g., without aﬀecting thecoricity of
Corollary 5.5, (i). We leave the routine details to the interested reader.
Remark 5.10.2. The signiﬁcance of the theory oflog-shells as summarized in
Corollary 5.10 — and, more generally, of the entire theory of the present paper —
may be understood in more intuitive terms as follows.

150 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(i) One important aspect of the classical theory ofline bundles on a proper
curve[overaﬁeld]isthatalthoughsuchlinebundlesexhibitacertain rigidity arising
from the propernessofthecurve, thisrigidityisobliteratedby Zariski localizationon
the curve. Put another way, to work with line bundles up to isomorphism amounts
to allowing oneself to “multiply the line bundle by a rational function”, i.e., to work
up to rational equivalence. Although rational equivalence does not obliterate the
global degreeof a line bundle over the entire proper curve, if one thinks of a line
bundle as a collection ofintegral structuresat the various primes of the curve, then
rational equivalence has the eﬀect of“rearranging these integral structures”at the
various primes.
⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎜
⎜
⎜⎜⎜
⎜
⎜⎜⎜
⎜⎝
□
□
□
v
1
□
□
□
□
v2
□
□
v3
□
□
□
v
4
□
□
□
□
□
v
5
...
⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎟
⎟
⎟⎟⎟
⎟
⎟⎟⎟
⎟⎠
rational
equivalence
⇝
⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎜
⎜
⎜⎜⎜
⎜
⎜⎜⎜
⎜⎝
□
□
□
□
□
v
1
□
v2
□
□
□
□
□
□
v3
□
□
□
v
4
□
□
□
□
v5
...
⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎟
⎟
⎟⎟⎟
⎟
⎟⎟⎟
⎟⎠
⎛
⎜⎜
⎜⎜⎜
⎜
⎜⎜⎜
⎜
⎜⎜⎜⎝
□
□
□
v
1
□
□
□
□
v2
□
□
□
v
3
□
□
□
v
4
□
□
□
□
v5
...
⎞
⎟⎟
⎟⎟⎟
⎟
⎟⎟⎟
⎟
⎟⎟⎟⎠
panalocalized
log-shells
⇝
⎛
⎜⎜
⎜⎜⎜
⎜
⎜⎜⎜
⎜
⎜⎜⎜⎝
■
■
■
v
1
■
■
■
■
v2
■
■
■
v
3
■
■
■
v
4
■
■
■
■
v5
...
⎞
⎟⎟
⎟⎟⎟
⎟
⎟⎟⎟
⎟
⎟⎟⎟⎠
If one restricts oneself to working globally on the proper curve, then such “rear-
rangements” are coordinated with one another in such a way as to preserve, for
instance, the global degree; on the other hand, if one further imposes the condition
of compatibility withZariski localization, then such “coordination of integral struc-
ture” mechanisms are obliterated. By contrast, the“MF
∇-objects”of [Falt] satisfy
a certain“extraordinary rigidity”with respect to Zariski localization that reﬂects
the fact that they form a category that is equivalent to a certain category of Galois
representations. From the point of view of thinking of line bundles as collections
of integral structures at the various primes, the rigidity ofMF∇-objects may be
thought of as a sort of“freezing of the integral structures”at the various
primes in a fashion that is immune to the gluing indeterminacies that occur for line
bundles upon execution of Zariski localization operations. Put another way, this
rigidity may be thought of as a sort of“immunity to social isolation” from
other primes. In the context of Corollary 5.10, this property corresponds to the
panalocalizability [i.e., Corollary 5.10, (iii)] of [the integral structures constituted
by] log-shells.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 151
(ii) At this point, it is useful to observe that, at least from ana prioripoint of
view, there exist other ways in which one might attempt to “freeze the local integral
structures”. For instance, instead of working strictly with line bundles, one could
consider thering structureof the global ring of integers of a number ﬁeld [which
g i v e sr i s et ot h etrivial line bundle— cf. Deﬁnition 5.3, (ii)]; that is to say, by con-
sidering ring structures, one obtains a “rigid integral structure” that is compatible
with Zariski localization — i.e., by considering thering structure “O”of the local
rings of integers [cf. Remark 5.4.3]. Indeed,log-shells may be thought of — and,
moreover, were originally intended by the author — as a sort ofapproximation
of these local integral structures “O” [cf. Remark 5.4.2]. On the other hand, this
sort of rigidiﬁcation of local integral structures that makes essential use of the ring
structure is no longer compatible with the operation ofmono-analyticization [cf.
Remark 5.6.1], i.e., of forgetting one of the two combinatorial dimensions “⊞”, “⊠”
that constitute the ring structure. Thus, another crucial property of log-shells is
their compatibility withmono-analyticization, as documented in Corollary 5.10,
(iv) [cf. also Remarks 5.8.1, 5.9.2; Deﬁnition 5.9, (iii)], i.e., their“immunity to
social isolation” from the given ring structures. From the point of view of
the theory of§1, §2, §3, §4, such ring structures may be thought of as“arithmetic
holomorphic structures”[i.e., outer Galois actions at nonarchimedean primes and
Aut-holomorphic structures at archimedean primes] — cf. Remark 5.6.1. Thus, if
one thinks of the result offorgetting such “arithmetic holomorphic structures” as
being like a sort of“arithmetic real analytic core”on whichvarious “arithmetic
holomorphic structures”may be imposed — i.e., a sort of arithmetic analogue of
the underlying real analytic surface of a Riemann surface, on which various holo-
morphic structures may be imposed [cf. Remark 5.10.3 below] — then the theory
of mono-analyticization of log-shells guarantees that log-shells remain meaningful
even as onetravels back and forthbetween various“zones of arithmetic holo-
morphy”joined — in a fashion reminiscent ofspokes emanating from a core—
by a single“mono-analytic core”.
...
arith.
hol.
str. A
...
arith. hol. str. B
mono-analytic
core arith. hol. str. C
... arith.
hol.
str. D
...

152 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(iii)Anotherapproachtoconstructing“mono-analyticrigidlocalintegralstruc-
tures” is to work with the local monoids “O⊿” [i.e., as opposed to “log(O×)”, as
was done in the case of log-shells]. Here, “O⊿” may be thought of as a [possibly
twisted] product of “O×” with some“valuation monoid”that consists of a sub-
monoid ofR≥0. For instance, in the [complex] archimedean case,O⊿
C
∼=O×
C ×R>0.
On the other hand [cf. Remark 5.6.1], the dimension constituted by the “valua-
tion monoid”R>0 fails to retain its rigiditywhen subjected to the operation of
mono-analyticization. The resulting “dilations”of R>0 [i.e., by raising to theλ-
th power, forλ∈R>0] may be thought of as being likeTeichm¨uller dilations of
the mono-analytic corediscussed in (ii) above [cf. also the discussion of Remark
5.10.3 below]. If, moreover, one is to retain a coherent theory of global degrees
of arithmetic line bundles in the presence of such “arithmetic Teichm¨uller dila-
tions”, then [in order to preserve the“product formula”of elementary number
theory] it is necessary to subject the valuation monoids atnonarchimedean primes
to “arithmetic Teichm¨uller dilations” which are“synchronized”with the dilations
that occur at the archimedean primes. From the point of the theory ofFrobenioids
of [Mzk16], [Mzk17], such “arithmetic Teichm¨uller dilations” at nonarchimedean
primes are given by theunit-linear Frobenius functorstudied in [Mzk16], Proposi-
tion 2.5. Thus, in summary:
In order to guarantee therigidity of the local integral structures under
consideration when subject to mono-analyticization, one must abandon
the “valuation monoid” portion of “O⊿”, i.e., one is obliged to restrict
one’s attention to the “O×” portion of “O⊿”.
On the other hand, within eachzone of arithmetic holomorphy[cf. (ii)], one wishes
to considervarious diverse modiﬁcations of integral structureon the “rigid standard
integral structures” that one constructs. Since this is not possible if one restricts
oneself to “O×”regarded multiplicatively, one is thus led to working with “log(O×)”
— i.e., in eﬀect with thelog-shells discussed in Corollary 5.10. Thus,within each
zone of arithmetic holomorphy, one wishes to convert the “⊠” operation of “O×”
into a “⊞” operation, i.e., by applying thelogarithm. On the other hand, when
one leaves that zone of arithmetic holomorphy, one wishes toreturn again to work-
ing with “O×”multiplicatively, so as to achieve compatibility with the operation of
mono-analyticization. Here, we note that⊠-line bundles — i.e., in other words, line
bundles regarded from anid`elic point of view — have the virtue of being deﬁned
using only themultiplicativestructure of the rings involved [cf. the theory ofFrobe-
nioids of [Mzk16], [Mzk17]], hence of being compatible with mono-analyticization.
[We remark here that the detailed speciﬁcation of preciselywhich monoidswe wish
to use when we apply the theory of Frobenioids is beyond the scope of the present
paper.] By contrast, although⊞-line bundles — i.e., line bundes regarded asmod-
ules of a certain type — are not compatible with mono-analyticization, they have
the virtue of allowing us torelate, within each zone of arithmetic holomorphy, the
additive module “log(O×)” to the theory of⊠-line bundles [which is compatible
with mono-analyticization]. Thus, in summary:
This state of aﬀairs obliges one to work in a“framework”in which one
may pass freely, within each zone of arithmetic holomorphy, back and
forth between “⊞”a n d“⊠” via application of thelogarithmat the various
nonarchimedean and archimedean primes.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 153
On the other hand, since the logarithm is not a ring homomorphism,i ti sn o t
at all clear, a priori, how to establish a framework in which one may apply the
logarithm at will [within each zone of arithmetic holomorphy], without obliterating
the foundations [e.g., scheme-theoretic!] underlying the mathematical objects
that one works with, and, moreover, [a related issue — cf. Remark 5.4.1] without
obliterating the crucial global structure of the number ﬁelds involved [which is
necessary to make sense of global arithmetic line bundles!].
A solution to this problem of ﬁnding an appropriate“framework”as dis-
cussed above is precisely what is provided by“Galois theory”[cf. also
the “log-invariant log-volumes”of Corollary 5.10, (i), (ii)] — which is both
global and “log-invariant”;t h esuﬃciency of this “framework” [from the
point of view of carrying out various arithmetic operations involving line
bundles, as discussed above] is precisely what is guaranteed by themono-
anabelian theory of Corollaries 3.6, 4.5, 5.5.
⊞ ◁ ⊠
log ↗↘ log
⊠
▽
⊞
core:
some ﬁxed
arithmetic holomorphic
structure
⊞
△
⊠
log ↖↙ log
...
At a more philosophical level, the“log-invariantcore”furnished by “Galois theory”
[cf. the remarks concerningtelecoresfollowing Corollaries 3.6, 3.7] and supported,
in content, by “mono-anabelian geometry” may be thought of as a“geometry over
F1”[i.e., over the ﬁctitious ﬁeld of absolute constants inZ] with respect to which
the logarithm is“F1-linear”.
(iv) Note that in order to work with⊞-line bundles[cf. the discussion of (iii);
Deﬁnition 5.3, (ii)], it is necessary [unlike the case with⊠-line bundles] to work
with all the primes of a number ﬁeld. Indeed, to work with “line bundles” in a
fashion that allows one to ignore some nonempty set of primes of the number ﬁeld
amounts to working with a notion ofrational equivalencethat involves someproper
subgroupof the multiplicative groupF× associated to the number ﬁeldF.O nt h e
other, the only subgroups ofF× that [if one considers the union ofF× with {0}]
are closed under additionare the subgroups ofF× that arise fromsubﬁelds of F,
i.e., which correspond, in eﬀect, to⊞-line bundles as in Deﬁnition 5.3, (ii).
(v) The importance of the process ofmono-analyticization in the discussion of
(ii), (iii) is reminiscent of the discussion in [Mzk18], Remark 1.10.4, concerning the
topic of “restricting oneself to workingonly with multiplicative structures”i nt h e
context of the theory of the´etale theta function.

154 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(vi) Finally, we recall that from the point of view of the discussion oftelecores
in the remarks following Corollaries 3.6, 3.7, the various“forgetful functors”of
assertion (ii) of Corollaries 3.6, 4.5, 5.5 may be thought of as being analogous to
passing to the“underlying vector bundle plus Hodge ﬁltration”of anMF∇-object
[cf. Remark 3.7.2]. From this point of view:
Log-shells may be thought of, in the context of this analogy withMF∇-
objects, as corresponding to the section of a [projective] nilpotent ad-
missible indigenous bundle in positive characteristic determined by the
p-curvature [i.e., in other words, the Frobenius conjugateof the Hodge
ﬁltration].
Remark 5.10.3. From the point of the view of the analogy of the theory ofmono-
anabelian log-compatibility[cf. §3,§4]withthetheoryof uniformizingMF∇-objects
[cf. Remark 3.7.2], theglobal/panalocal/mono-analytic theory of log-shellspresented
in the present§5 may be understood as follows.
(i) The mathematical apparatus on anumber ﬁeldarising from theglobal/pana-
local mono-anabelianlog-compatibilityof Corollary 5.5 may be thought of as being
analogous to the [modp]MF∇-object constituted by anilpotent indigenous bundle
on a hyperbolic curve in positive characteristic [cf. the theory of [Mzk1], [Mzk4]].
Note that this mathematical apparatus on a number ﬁeld arises, essentially, from
the outer Galois representationdetermined by aonce-punctured elliptic curveover
the number ﬁeld. That is to say, roughly speaking, we have correspondences as
follows:
number ﬁeldF ←→hyperbolic curveC in pos. char.
once-punctured ell. curveX over F ←→ nilp. indig. bundle P over C.
Here, we note that the correspondence between number ﬁelds and curves over ﬁnite
ﬁelds is quite classical; the correspondence between families of elliptic curves and
indigenous bundles is natural in the sense that the most fundamental example of an
indigenous bundle is given by the projectivization of the ﬁrst de Rham cohomology
module of the tautological family of elliptic curves over the moduli stack of elliptic
curves. Note, moreover, that:
Justasinthecaseofindigenousbundles, thefactthatthe Kodaira-Spencer
morphism is an isomorphism may be interpreted as asserting that the
base curve “entrusts its local modulito the indigenous bundle”,i nt h e
mono-anabelian theory of the present paper, thevarious localizations of
an u m b e rﬁ e l d“entrust their ring structures to the mono-anabelian
data determined by the once-punctured elliptic curve”[cf. Remarks 1.9.4,
2.7.3, 5.6.1; Remark 5.10.2, (iii)].
Relative to this analogy, we observe thatpanalocalizabilitycorresponds to thelocal
rigidity ofMF∇-objects[cf. Remark 5.10.2, (i)]. Moreover, the operation ofmono-
analyticization — i.e.,“forgetting the once-punctured elliptic curve”— corresponds
toforgettingtheindigenousbundle, henceto relinquishing control of the local moduli
ofthebasecurve C; thus, justasthisledto “Teichm¨uller dilations”inthediscussion
of Remark 5.10.2, (ii), (iii), in the theory of indigenous bundles, forgetting the

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 155
indigenous bundle means, in particular, loss of control of thedeformation moduli
of the base curveC. Another noteworthy aspect of this analogy may be seen in the
fact that:
Just as thelog-Frobenius operation only exists forlocal ﬁelds [cf. Re-
mark 5.4.1], in the theory of indigenous bundles,Frobenius liftingsonly
exist Zariski locally on the base curveC.
On the other hand, unlike the“linear algebra-theoretic”nature of the theory of
indigenous bundles [which may be thought of as sl2-bundles], the outer Galois
representations that appear in the theory of the present paper arefundamentally
“anabelian”in nature — i.e., their “non-abelian nature” is not limited to a rela-
tively weak “linear algebra-theoretic” departure from abelianity, but rather on a
par with that of [proﬁnite] free groups. In particular, unlike the linear algebra-
theoretic [i.e., “sl2-theoretic”] nature of theintertwining of the two dimensionsof
an indigenous vector bundle, the two combinatorial dimensions involved [cf. Re-
mark 5.6.1] are intertwined in an essentially anabelian fashion[i.e., constitute a
sort of“noncommutative plane”].
(ii) Once one has the“rigid standard integral structures”constituted by log-
shells [cf. Remark 5.10.2, (iii)], it is natural to consider modifying these integral
structures by means of the“Gaussian zeroes”[i.e., the inverse of the “Gaussian
poles”] that appear in theHodge-Arakelov theory of elliptic curves[cf., e.g.,
[Mzk6], §1.1]. From the point of view of this theory, this amounts, in eﬀect, to
considering the“crystalline theta object”[cf. [Mzk7], §2]. That is to say, the
mathematical apparatus developed in the present§5 may be thought of as a sort
of preparatory step, relative to the goal of constructing a“global MF∇-object-
type version of the crystalline theta object”. This point of view is in line with the
point of view of the Introduction to [Mzk18] [cf. also [Mzk18], Remark 5.10.2],
together with the fact that the theory of the´etale theta functiongiven in [Mzk18],
§1, involves, in an essential way, the theory ofelliptic cuspidalizations[cf. Remark
2.7.2]. Moreover, this point of view is reminiscent of the discussion in [Mzk7],§2,
of the relation of crystalline theta objects toMF∇-objects — that is to say, the
crystalline theta object has many properties that are similar to those of anMF∇-
object, with the notable exception constituted by thevanishing of the higher p-
curvatures despite the fact that the Kodaira-Spencer morphism is an isomorphism
[cf. [Mzk7], Remark 2.11]. This vanishing of higher p-curvatures, when viewed
from the point of view of the theory of “VF-patterns” of indigenous bundles in
[Mzk4], seems to suggest that, whereas the indigenous bundles considered in the
p-adic uniformization theory of [Mzk4] are of“ﬁnite Frobenius period”[in the sense
that they are ﬁxed, up to isomorphism, by someﬁnite number of applications of
Frobenius], the crystalline theta object may only be equipped with an “MF∇-
object structure” if one allows forinﬁnite Frobenius periods. On the other
hand, by comparison to the Frobenius morphisms that appear in the theory of
[Mzk4], the log-Frobenius operationlog certainly has the feel of an operation of
“inﬁnite order”. Moreover, as discussed in Remark 3.6.5, thetelecoricity of the
mathematical apparatus of Corollary 5.5 may be regarded as being analogous to
nilpotent, but non-vanishingp-curvature. That is to say:
By considering the crystalline theta object not in the scheme-theoretic
framework of [scheme-theoretic!] Hodge-Arakelov theory, but rather in

156 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
the mono-anabelian framework of the present paper, one obtains a theory
in which the “contradiction”[from the point of view of the classical
theory ofMF∇-objects] of “vanishing higherp-curvatures in the presence
of a Kodaira-Spencer isomorphism” isnaturally resolved.
The above discussion suggests that one may reﬁne the correspondence between
“once-punctured elliptic curves” and “indigenous bundles” discussed in (i) as fol-
lows:
crystalline theta objects
in scheme-theoretic
Hodge-Arakelov theory
←→
the scheme-theoretic
aspects of
indigenous bundles
[cf. [Mzk1], Chapter I]
the theory ofmono-anabelian
log-Frobenius compatibility
of the present paper — i.e., in
essence, Belyi cuspidalization
←→
the positive characteristic
Frobenius-theoreticaspects
of indigenous bundles
— e.g., theVerschiebung
on ind. buns.
[cf. [Mzk1], Chapter II]
Note that the mono-anabelian theory of the present paper depends, in an essential
w a y ,o nt h et e c h n i q u eo fBelyi cuspidalization[cf. §1]. Since the technique ofelliptic
cuspidalization [cf., e.g., the theory of [Mzk18],§1!] may be thought of as a sort
of simpliﬁed, linearized [cf. (v) below]version of the technique of Belyi cuspidal-
ization, and theFrobenius action on square diﬀerentialsin the theory of [Mzk1],
ChapterII,maybeidentiﬁedwiththe derivative[i.e., asortof“simpliﬁed, linearized
version”] of theVerschiebung on indigenous bundles, it is natural to supplement
the correspondences given above with the following further correspondence:
the theory of the´etale
theta functiongiven in [Mzk18]
— i.e., in essence,elliptic
cuspidalization
←→
the Frobenius actionon the
linear space of
square diﬀerentials
[cf. [Mzk1], Chapter II]
These analogies with the theory of [Mzk1], Chapter II, suggest the following further
possible correspondences:
hyp. orbicurvesof strictly Belyi type
?
←→nilp. admissible ind. buns.
elliptically admissible hyp. orbicurves
?
←→ nilp. ordinary ind. buns.
[i.e., where all of the hyperbolic orbicurves involved are deﬁned overnumber ﬁelds
— cf. Remark 2.8.3]. At any rate, the correspondence with the theory of Chapters
I, II of [Mzk1] suggests strongly the existence of atheory of canonical liftings
for number ﬁelds equipped with a once-punctured elliptic curvethat is
analogous to the theory of Chapter III of [Mzk1]. The author hopes to develop
such a theory in a future paper.
(iii) Relative to the discussion of“units”versus “valuation monoids”in Re-
mark 5.10.2, (iii), the fact that the logarithm [i.e., log-Frobenius] has the eﬀect of

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 157
converting [a certain portion of] the“units”into a “new log-generation valuation
monoid”is very much in line with the“positive slope”— i.e., “telecore-theoretic”
— nature of a uniformizingMF∇-object [cf. the discussion of (i), (ii)]. Indeed,
from the point of view of uniformizations of aTate curve [cf. the discussion of
Remark 2.7.2; the discussion of the Introduction of [Mzk18]] the valuation monoid
portion of an MLF corresponds precisely to“slope zero”, whereas the units of an
MLF correspond to“positive slope”; a similar such correspondence also appears in
classical formulations oflocal class ﬁeld theory.
(iv) One important aspect of the theory of the present paper is that it is
only applicable toelliptically admissible hyperbolic orbicurves, i.e., hyperbolic or-
bicurves that are closely related to aonce-punctured elliptic curve. In light of the
“entrusting of local moduli/ring structure”aspect of the theory of the present paper
discussed in (i) above, it seems reasonable to suspect that thisspecial nature of
once-punctured elliptic curves [i.e., relative to the theory of the present pa-
per] may be closely related to the fact that, unlike arbitrary hyperbolic orbicurves,
the moduli stack of once-punctured elliptic curves hasprecisely one [holomorphic]
dimension [i.e., corresponding to the “one holomorphic dimension” of a number
ﬁeld]. This “special nature of once-punctured elliptic curves” is also reminiscent
of the observation made in [Mzk6],§1.5.2, to the eﬀect that it does not appear
possible [at least in any immediate way] to generalize the scheme-theoretic Hodge-
Arakelov theory of elliptic curves either to higher-dimensional abelian varieties or
to higher genus curves. Moreover, it is reminiscent of theparallelogram-theoretic
reconstruction algorithmsof Corollary 2.7, which, from the point of view of the the-
ory of [Mzk14],§2, may only be performed canonicallyonce one chooses some ﬁxed
“one-dimensional space of square diﬀerentials”— a choice which is not necessary
in the elliptically admissible case, precisely because of the one-dimensionality of the
moduli of once-punctured elliptic curves.
(v) Observe that the“arithmetic Teichm¨uller dilations”discussed in Remark
5.10.2, (iii) — which deform the“arithmetic holomorphic structure”—a r elinearin
nature [cf., e.g., the “unit-linear Frobenius functor”]. On the other hand, thelog-
Frobenius operationwithin each“zone of arithmetic holomorphy”is “non-linear”,
with respect to both the additive and multiplicative structures of the rings involved.
Indeed, asdiscussedextensivelyintheremarksfollowingCorollaries3.6, 3.7[cf. also
the discussion in the latter half of Remark 5.10.2, (iii)], the essential reason for the
introduction ofmono-anabelian geometryin the present paper is precisely the need
to deal with this non-linearity. In the classical theory of Teichm¨uller deformations
of Riemann surfaces, the deformations of holomorphic structure arelinear [cf. the
approach to this theory given in [Mzk14],§2]. On the other hand, non-linearity
may be witnessed in classical Teichm¨uller theory in the quadratic nature of the
square diﬀerentials. Typically, non-linearity is related to some sort of“bounded
domain”. In the complex theory, thebounded natureof the upper half-plane, as
well as of Teichm¨uller space itself, constitute examples of this phenomenon — cf.
the discussion of “Frobenius-invariant integral structures” in [Mzk4], Introduction,
§0.4. In the case of elliptic curves, the quadratic nature of the square diﬀerentials
corresponds precisely to thequadratic nature of the exponentthat appears in the
classical series representation of thetheta function; moreover, this quadratic cor-
respondence “Z ∋ n ↦→n2 ∈Z” is [unlike the linear correspondencen ↦→c· n,
for c ∈Z] bounded from below. Returning to the theory oflog-shells, let us recall

158 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
that the non-linear log-Frobenius operation is used precisely to achieve thecru-
cial boundedness[i.e., “compactness”] property of log-shells [cf. the discussion of
Remark 5.10.2!]. Also, relative to the discussion of (ii) above, let us recall that
the goal of constructing a comparison isomorphism betweennon-linear compact
domains of function spacesformed one of the key motivations for the development
of the Hodge-Arakelov theory of elliptic curves [cf. [Mzk6],§1.3.2, §1.3.3].
(vi) Relative to the analogy between “once-punctured elliptic curves over num-
ber ﬁelds” and “nilpotent indigenous bundles” [cf. (i)], it is interesting to note that
if one thinks of the number ﬁelds involved as“log number ﬁelds”— i.e., number
ﬁelds equipped with a ﬁnite set of primes at which the elliptic curve is allowed to
have bad [but multiplicative!] reduction — thenSiegel’s classical ﬁniteness theorem
[which implies the ﬁniteness of the set of isomorphism classes of elliptic curves over
a given “log number ﬁeld”] may be regarded as the analogue of theﬁniteness of
the Verschiebung on indigenous bundlesgiven in [Mzk1], Chapter II, Theorem 2.3
[whichimpliestheﬁnitenessofthesetofisomorphismclassesofnilpotentindigenous
bundles over a given hyperbolic curve in positive characteristic].
Remark 5.10.4. The analogy withFrobenius liftingsthat appears in the discus-
sion of Remark 5.10.3 is interesting from the point of view of the theory of [Mzk21],
§2 [cf., especially [Mzk21], Remark 2.9.1]. Indeed, [Mzk21], §2, may be thought
of as a theory concerning the issue ofpassing from decomposition groups to ring
[i.e., additive!] structures in a p-adic setting [cf. [Mzk21], Corollary 2.9], hence
may be thought of as a sort ofp-adic analogue of thelemma of Uchidareviewed in
Proposition 1.3.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 159
Appendix: Complements on Complex Multiplication
In the present Appendix, we expose the portion of thewell-known theory of
abelian varieties with complex multiplication[cf., e.g., [Lang-CM], [Milne-CM], for
more details] that underlies the observation “(∗CM)” — i.e., roughly speaking, to
the eﬀect that, ifp is a prime number, then
every Lubin-Tate characteron an open subgroup of the inertia group
of the absolute Galois group of ap-adic local ﬁeld arises, after possible
restriction to an open subgroup, from a subquotient of thep-adic Tate
module associated to anabelian varietywith complex multiplication
— related to the author byA. Tamagawa[cf. [Mzk20], Remark 3.8.1]. In particular,
weverify that this observation (∗CM) does indeed hold. [Here, we remark in passing
that the proof of (∗CM) given in the present Appendix is, according to Tamagawa,
apparently somewhat diﬀerent from the proof that he originally considered. Unfor-
tunately, however, he was unable to recall the details of his original argument.] This
implies that the observation “(∗A-qLT)” discussed in [Mzk20], Remark 3.8.1, also
holds, and hence, in particular, that the hypothesis of [Mzk20], Corollary 3.9, to the
eﬀect that “either (∗A-qLT)o r(∗CM)h o l d s ”m a yb eeliminated [i.e., that [Mzk20],
Corollary 3.9, holdsunconditionally]. On the other hand, we conclude the present
Appendix by observing that, in this context, there still remains an interestingopen
problem that could serve to stimulate further research.
In the following, we shall ﬁx aprime number p and write Q for the ﬁeld of
rational numbers, Zp for the topological ring ofp-adic integers, Qp for the topolog-
ical ﬁeld ofp-adic numbers, R for the topological ﬁeld ofreal numbers, C for the
topological ﬁeld ofcomplex numbers, ι: C →C for the automorphism ofC given
by complex conjugation,a n dQalg ⊆C for the subﬁeld ofalgebraic numbers.A l s o ,
we shall use the notation “O”t od e n o t et h ering of integersassociated to a ﬁnite
extension ofQ or Qp and the notation “tr(−)”t od e n o t et h etrace mapassociated
to a ﬁnite ﬁeld extension “(−)”.
(CM1) Fix a ﬁnite extensionL of degreed≥1o fQp.T h u s ,L = Qp(α)f o rs o m e
α∈L.L e tf(x)∈Qp[x] be a monic irreducible polynomial such thatf(α)=0 .I f
d = 2, then setg(x)
def
= x2 +1;if d̸= 2, then setg(x)
def
=( x−1)(x−2)·... ·(x−d).
Thus, bothf(x)∈Qp[x]a n dg(x)∈Q[x] are of degreed. Then by approximating
t h ec o e ﬃ c i e n t so ff and g by elements ofQ at thep-adic and real places ofQ,w e
conclude that there exists amonic polynomial h(x) ∈Q[x] of degreed such that
the following conditions hold:
(a) there exists an elementβ∈L such thath(β)=0a n dL = Qp(β);
(b) if d = 2, then the complex roots ofh(x)a r enon-realand distinct;
(c) if d̸= 2, then the complex roots ofh(x)a r erealand distinct.
Indeed, (a) follows by arguing as in [Kobl], pp. 69-70; (b) follows by considering
the sign of thediscriminant of h(x); (c) follows by considering thesigns of values
of g(x)a sx varies over the real numbers in the variousintervals between rootsof
g(x). Note that it follows from (a) that the polynomialh(x)∈Q[x]i sirreducible.
Thus, we obtain anumber ﬁeld

160 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
F
def
= Q[x]/(h(x))
such that [F : Q]= d,a n dF ⊗Q Qp is isomorphic to L.I f d =2 ,t h e nF is a
complex quadratic extensionof Q, hence admits an elementγ∈F \ Q such that
γ2 ∈Q [which implies thatγ2 < 0, F = Q(γ)]. Next, let us observe [cf. [Kobl],
p. 81] that 1−p3 admits a square rootin Qp.T h u s ,i fd ̸= 2, then the number
ﬁeld F is totally realand hencelinearly disjointover Q from thecomplex quadratic
extension K0
def
= Q(λ0), whereλ2
0 =1 −p3. In particular, ifd̸= 2, then the number
ﬁeld
K
def
= F ·K0
is aCM ﬁeld [cf., e.g., [Lang-CM], Chapter 1,§2] of degree 2d over Q.
(CM2) Suppose that d =2 . L e tϕ0 : F↪ →C be an embedding such that the
imaginary part ofϕ0(γ)i spositive.W r i t eιF ∈Gal(F/Q) for the unique nontrivial
element of Gal(F/Q)[ s oϕ0 ◦ιF = ι◦ϕ0]. Then recall [cf., e.g., [Lang-CM],
Chapter 1,§4] that thecomplex torus C/ϕ0(OF), together with theRiemann
form determined by the pairing (ξ,η) ↦→ trF/Q(ξ·ιF(η)·γ)∈Q [where ξ,η∈F],
determine an elliptic curve E with complex multiplication by OF,w h i c hi s
deﬁned over some ﬁnite subextensionM of ϕ0(F)i nC. Now it is immediate from
the Main Theorem of Complex Multiplication[i.e., Shimura reciprocity—
cf., e.g., [Lang-CM], Chapter 4, Theorem 1.1; [Milne-CM], Theorem 10.1] that there
exists anopen subgroupH of theinertia group⊆GM
def
= Gal(Qalg/M) associated
to some prime ofQalg that dividesp such thatH acts on thep-adic Tate module
associated to E via the Lubin-Tate characterassociated to L. This completes
the proof of (∗CM) in the cased =2 .
(CM3) Suppose thatd ̸=2 .L e tΦ0 be a collection ofd embeddings K↪→C of K
into the complex numbers such that every embeddingF↪ →C is obtained as the
restriction of an element of Φ0, and, moreover, the embeddings of Φ0 map λ0 to
a complex number whose imaginary part ispositive. [Thus, the embeddings of Φ0
coincideon K0.] Fix an elementϕ0 ∈Φ0. Thus, one veriﬁes immediately that both
Φ0 and
Φ
def
= {ϕ0}∪{ ι◦ϕ| ϕ0 ̸= ϕ∈Φ0}
form CM types of K [cf., e.g., [Lang-CM], Chapter 1,§2]. Moreover, if we write
Φι
0
def
= {ι◦ϕ| ϕ∈Φ0}, then one veriﬁes immediately that the set of embeddings
K↪→C [or, equivalently,K↪→Qalg]
Φ0 ∪Φι
0
∼
→ Φ0 ×{ id,ι}
[where id denotes the identity automorphism ofC]a d m i t sanatural actionbyGQ
def
=
Gal(Qalg/Q)t h a tpreserves the product decomposition[induced by restricting the
embeddings in question toF or K0] of the above display. Then one veriﬁes immedi-
ately that the subgroup ofGQ that stabilizes Φ0 is equal toGK0
def
= Gal(Qalg/K0),
and hence that thereﬂex ﬁeld [cf., e.g., [Lang-CM], Chapter 1,§5] associated to
(K,Φ0)i se q u a lt oϕ0(K0). On the other hand, observe that our assumption that
d̸= 2 implies that thecardinalities[namely, 1 andd−1] of the intersections Φ∩Φ0
and Φ∩Φι
0 are distinct. Thus, since the action ofany element ofGQ on Φ0 ∪Φι
0 is

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 161
compatiblewith theprojectionto the set{id,ι}, one veriﬁes immediately [by consid-
ering theﬁbers, i.e., Φ0 and Φι
0, of this projection] that our assumption thatd̸=2
implies that an element ofGQ stabilizes Φ if and only if itﬁxes ϕ0.I np a r t i c u l a r ,
we conclude that thereﬂex ﬁeld [cf., e.g., [Lang-CM], Chapter 1,§5] associated
to (K,Φ) is equal toϕ0(K).
(CM4) We continue our analysis of the situation discussed in (CM3). WriteιK ∈
Gal(K/F) for the unique nontrivial element of Gal(K/F)[ s oϕ◦ιK = ι◦ϕ,f o r
all ϕ∈Φ]. Observe that by approximatingλ0 relative toϕ0 and −λ0 relative to
ϕ∈Φ\{ϕ0}, one may construct an elementλ∈K such that the imaginary part
of ϕ(λ)i spositive for allϕ∈Φ. Moreover, by replacingλby λ−ιK(λ), one may
assume without loss of generality thatιK(λ)= −λ. Next, recall [cf., e.g., [Lang-
CM], Chapter 1,§4] that theCM type(K,Φ), together with thelatticeOK ⊆K
and theRiemann formdetermined by the pairing (ξ,η) ↦→trK/Q(ξ·ιK(η)·λ)∈
Q [where ξ,η∈K], determine a polarized abelian variety A with complex
multiplicationbyOK, which is deﬁned over some ﬁnite subextensionM of ϕ0(K)
in C.N e x t ,w r i t eGM
def
= Gal(Qalg/M), Tp(A) for thep-adic Tate moduleassociated
to A.T h u s ,Tp(A) admits a natural structure ofrank one freeOK ⊗Zp-module,
as well as a naturalGM-action. In particular, sinceOK ⊗Zp ∼=OL ⊕OL,w et h u s
conclude thatTp(A)a d m i t sadirect sum decompositionTp(A)= T′⊕T′′ as a direct
sum of rank one freeOL-modules T′, T′′. On the other hand, let us recall that
the Main Theorem of Complex Multiplication [i.e., Shimura reciprocity
— cf., e.g., [Lang-CM], Chapter 4, Theorem 1.1; [Milne-CM], Theorem 10.1] allows
one to compute the Galois action ofGM on Tp(A) by means of thereﬂex type
norm applied to an id`ele of M. In particular, it follows immediately from our
construction of Φfrom Φ0 in (CM3), together with the resulting computation of
the associatedreﬂex ﬁeld, that, after possibly interchangingT′ and T′′, there exists
an open subgroupH of the inertia group⊆GM associated to some prime ofQalg
that dividesp such thatH acts onT1 via theLubin-Tate character
χLT : H →O×
L
associated to L [i.e., in essence, via the embedding ϕ0]a n do nT2 via the dual
character
χ∗
LT : H →O×
L
[that is to say, the character determined by the relationχLT · χ∗
LT = χcycl,w h e r e
χcycl : H →Z×
p is thecyclotomic character, i.e., in essence,via the product of the
embeddings∈Φ\{ ϕ0}]. This completes the proof of the observation (∗CM)[ f o r
arbitrary d].
(CM5) The above argument completes the proof of the observation (∗CM) and hence
also of the observation (∗A-qLT), of [Mzk20], Remark 3.8.1. On the other hand,
we conclude by observing that, in this context, the followingproblem remains
unresolved:
Let X be ahyperbolic curveover a ﬁnite extensionk of Qp.T h e ni si t
always the case that the ´etale fundamental group ofX is of A-qLT-type
[cf. [Mzk20], Deﬁnition 3.1, (v)]?
Here, we recall that, roughly speaking, this condition of being “of A-qLT-type”
may be described as the condition that every Lubin-Tate character on the inertia

162 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
subgroup of an open subgroup of the absolute Galois group ofk arises, after possibly
restricting to an open subgroup, from some subquotient of thep-adic Tate module
of the Jacobian of a ﬁnite ´etale covering ofX [cf. [Mzk20], Deﬁnition 3.1, (v), for
more details]. Thus, (∗A-qLT) consists of the assertion that this problem admits an
aﬃrmative answer wheneverX admits a ﬁnite ´etale covering that, in turn, admits
a dominant map to a copy of the projective line minus three points overk.W e
recall from [Mzk20], Remark 3.8.1, that (∗A-qLT) is derived from (∗CM)b yu s i n g
Belyi maps. Thus, the above unresolved problem is particularly of interest in the
case ofvarious “classes”of X for whichtechniques involving Belyi maps cannot be
applied, e.g., the case ofproper X. Finally, we observe that
this problem may also be understood in the context of the general theme
of applications of Belyi maps, i.e., in the style ofBelyi injectivity or
[Andr´e], Theorems 7.2.1, 7.2.3 [which may be thought of as a sort ofp-
adic version of Belyi injectivity].
In the case of Belyi injectivity or Andr´e’s results, a version forarbitrary hyperbolic
curves was obtained, by applying techniques fromcombinatorial anabelian ge-
ometry, in [HM1], Theorem C [in the case of Belyi injectivity] and [HM2], Theorem
B[ i nt h ec a s eo fA n d r ´e’s results]. On the other hand, in the case of the unresolved
problem discussed above, it is not clear to the author at the present time how to
apply techniques from combinatorial anabelian geometry to resolve this problem.

TOPICS IN ABSOLUTE ANABELIAN GEOMETRY III 163
Bibliography
[Andr´e] Y. Andr´e, On a Geometric Description of Gal(Qp/Qp)a n dap-adic Avatar of
ˆGT, Duke Math. J.119 (2003), pp. 1-39.
[ArTt] E. Artin, J. Tate,Class Field Theory, Addison-Wesley (1990).
[Falt] G. Faltings, Crystalline Cohomology and p-adic Galois Representations,JAMI
Conference, Johns Hopkins Univ. Press (1990), 25-79.
[HM1] Y. Hoshi, S. Mochizuki, On the Combinatorial Anabelian Geometry of Nodally
Nondegenerate Outer Representations,Hiroshima Math. J.41 (2011), pp. 275-
342.
[HM2] Y. Hoshi, S. Mochizuki,Topics Surrounding the Combinatorial Anabelian Ge-
ometry of Hyperbolic Curves III: Tripods and Tempered Fundamental Groups,
RIMS Preprint1763 (November 2012).
[Ih] Y. Ihara, Lifting Curves over Finite Fields Together with the Characteristic
Correspondence Π+Π′, Jour. of Algebra75 (1982), pp. 452-483.
[Kobl] N. Koblitz, p-adic Numbers, p-adic Analysis, and Zeta Functions, Graduate
Texts in Mathematics 58, Springer-Verlag (1977).
[Lang-CM] S.Lang, Complex Multiplication, Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften
255, Springer-Verlag (1983).
[Milne-CM] J. S. Milne,Complex Multiplication, manuscript available at the following ad-
dress: http://www.jmilne.org/math/CourseNotes/cm.html
[Mzk1] S. Mochizuki, A Theory of Ordinaryp-adic Curves,Publ. of RIMS32 (1996),
pp. 957-1151.
[Mzk2] S.Mochizuki,AVersionoftheGrothendieckConjecturefor p-adicLocalFields,
The International Journal of Math.8 (1997), pp. 499-506.
[Mzk3] S. Mochizuki, Correspondences on Hyperbolic Curves,Journ. Pure Appl. Al-
gebra 131 (1998), pp. 227-244.
[Mzk4] S. Mochizuki, Foundations of p-adic Teichm¨uller Theory, AMS/IP Studies
in Advanced Mathematics11, American Mathematical Society/International
Press (1999).
[Mzk5] S. Mochizuki, The Local Pro-p Anabelian Geometry of Curves,Invent. Math.
138 (1999), pp. 319-423.
[Mzk6] S. Mochizuki, A Survey of the Hodge-Arakelov Theory of Elliptic Curves I,
Arithmetic Fundamental Groups and Noncommutative Algebra, Proceedings of
Symposia in Pure Mathematics 70, American Mathematical Society (2002),
pp. 533-569.
[Mzk7] S. Mochizuki, A Survey of the Hodge-Arakelov Theory of Elliptic Curves II,
Algebraic Geometry 2000, Azumino, Adv. Stud. Pure Math. 36, Math. Soc.
Japan (2002), pp. 81-114.
[Mzk8] S.Mochizuki,TopicsSurroundingtheAnabelianGeometryofHyperbolicCurves,
Galois Groups and Fundamental Groups, Mathematical Sciences Research In-
stitute Publications 41, Cambridge University Press (2003), pp. 119-165.

164 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
[Mzk9] S. Mochizuki, The Absolute Anabelian Geometry of Hyperbolic Curves,Galois
Theory and Modular Forms, Kluwer Academic Publishers (2004), pp. 77-122.
[Mzk10] S. Mochizuki, The Absolute Anabelian Geometry of Canonical Curves,Kazuya
Kato’s ﬁftieth birthday, Doc. Math. 2003, Extra Vol. , pp. 609-640.
[Mzk11] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of Anabelioids,Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci.40
(2004), pp. 819-881.
[Mzk12] S. Mochizuki, Galois Sections in Absolute Anabelian Geometry,Nagoya Math.
J. 179 (2005), pp. 17-45.
[Mzk13] S. Mochizuki, Semi-graphs of Anabelioids, Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci. 42
(2006), pp. 221-322.
[Mzk14] S. Mochizuki, Conformal and Quasiconformal Categorical Representation of
Hyperbolic Riemann Surfaces,Hiroshima Math. J.36 (2006), pp. 405-441.
[Mzk15] S. Mochizuki, Global Solvably Closed Anabelian Geometry,M a t h .J .O k a y a m a
Univ. 48 (2006), pp. 57-71.
[Mzk16] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of Frobenioids I: The General Theory,Kyushu J.
Math. 62 (2008), pp. 293-400.
[Mzk17] S. Mochizuki, The Geometry of Frobenioids II: Poly-Frobenioids,Kyushu J.
Math. 62 (2008), pp. 401-460.
[Mzk18] S. Mochizuki, The´Etale Theta Function and its Frobenioid-theoretic Manifes-
tations, Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci.45 (2009), pp. 227-349.
[Mzk19] S. Mochizuki, Absolute anabelian cuspidalizations of proper hyperbolic curves,
J. Math. Kyoto Univ.47 (2007), pp. 451-539.
[Mzk20] S. Mochizuki, Topics in Absolute Anabelian Geometry I: Generalities,J. Math.
Sci. Univ. Tokyo19 (2012), pp. 139-242.
[Mzk21] S.Mochizuki,TopicsinAbsoluteAnabelianGeometryII:DecompositionGroups
and Endomorphisms,J. Math. Sci. Univ. Tokyo20 (2013), pp. 171-269.
[MT] S. Mochizuki, A. Tamagawa, The algebraic and anabelian geometry of conﬁg-
uration spaces,Hokkaido Math. J.37 (2008), pp. 75-131.
[NSW] J.Neukirch,A.Schmidt,K.Wingberg, Cohomology of number ﬁelds, Grundlehren
der Mathematischen Wissenschaften 323, Springer-Verlag (2000).
[Pop] F. Pop, On Grothendieck’s conjecture of anabelian birational geometry,Ann.
of Math.138 (1994), pp. 147-185.
[Serre] J.-P. Serre,Lie Algebras and Lie Groups, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1500,
Springer Verlag (1992).
[Stix] J. Stix, Aﬃne anabelian curves in positive characteristic,Compositio Math.
134 (2002), pp. 75-85.
[Tama] A. Tamagawa, The Grothendieck Conjecture for Aﬃne Curves,Compositio
Math. 109 (1997), pp. 135-194.
[Uchi] K. Uchida, Isomorphisms of Galois groups of algebraic function ﬁelds,Ann. of
Math. 106 (1977), pp. 589-598.