Topics Surrounding
the Anabelian Geometry of Hyperbolic Curves
Shinichi Mochizuki
September 2002
Contents:
§0. Introduction
§1. The Tate Conjecture as a Sort of Grothendieck Conjecture
§1.1. The Tate Conjecture for non-CM Elliptic Curves
§1.2. Some Pro-p Group Theory
§2. Hyperbolic Curves as their own “Anabelian Albanese Varieties”
§2.1. A Corollary of the Main Theorem of [Mzk2]
§2.2. A Partial Generalization to Finite Characteristic
§3. Discrete Real Anabelian Geometry
§3.1. Real Complex Manifolds
§3.2. Fixed Points of Anti-Holomorphic Involutions
§3.3. Hyperbolic Curves and their Moduli
§3.4. Abelian Varieties and their Moduli
§3.5. Proﬁnite Real Anabelian Geometry
§4. Complements to the p-adic Theory
§4.1. Good Chern Classes
§4.2. The Group-Theoreticity of a Certain Chern Class
§4.3. A Generalization of the Main Result of [Mzk2]
Section 0: Introduction
In this manuscript, we give an exposition of various ideas and results related to
the fundamental results of [Tama1-2], [Mzk1-2] concerning Grothendieck’s Conjec-
ture of Anabelian Geometry(which we refer to as the “Grothendieck Conjecture” for
short; cf. [Mzk2], Introduction, for a brief introduction to this conjecture). Many
of these ideas existed prior to the publication of [Tama1-2], [Mzk1-2], but were not
Typeset by AMS-TEX
1

2 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
discussed in these papers because of their rather elementary nature and secondary
importance (by comparison to the main results of these papers). Nevertheless, it is
the hope of the author that the reader will ﬁnd the present manuscript useful as a
supplement to [Tama1-2], [Mzk1-2]. In particular, we hope that the discussion of
the present manuscript will serve to clarify the meaning and motivation behind the
main result of [Mzk2].
Our main results are the following:
(1) In §1, we take the reverse point of view to the usual one (i.e., that the
Grothendieck Conjecture should be regarded as a sort of (anabelian) Tate
Conjecture) and show that in a certain case, the Tate Conjecture may be
regarded as a sort of Grothendieck Conjecture(cf. Theorem 1.1, Corollary
1.2). In particular, Corollary 1.2 is interesting in that it allows one to
express the fundamental phenomenon involved in the Tate and Grothen-
dieck Conjectures using elementary language that can, in principle, be
understood even by high school students (cf. the Introduction to §1; the
Remarks following Corollary 1.2).
(2) In §2, we show how the main result of [Mzk2] gives rise to a purely
algebro-geometric corollary (i.e., one which has nothing to do with Galois
groups, arithmetic considerations, etc.) in characteristic 0 (cf. Corollary
2.1). Moreover, we give a partial generalization of this result to positive
characteristic (cf. Theorem 2.2).
(3) In §3, we discuss real analogues of anabelian geometry. Not surprisingly,
the real case is substantially easier than the case where the base ﬁeld is
p-adic or a number ﬁeld. Thus, we are able to prove much stronger results
in the real case than in the p-adic or number ﬁeld cases (cf. Theorem
3.6, Corollaries 3.7, 3.8, 3.10, 3.11, 3.13, 3.14, 3.15). In particular, we are
able to prove various real analogues of the so-called Section Conjecture of
anabelian geometry (which has not been proven, at the time of writing,
for any varieties over p-adic or number ﬁelds) — cf. [Groth], p. 289, (2);
[NTM], §1.2, (GC3), for a discussion of the Section Conjecture. Also, we
note that the real case is interesting relative to the analogy between the
diﬀerential geometry that occurs in the real case and certain aspects of
the p-adic case (cf. [Mzk4], Introduction, §0.10; the Introduction to §3o f
the present manuscript). It was this analogy that led the author to the
proof of the main result of [Mzk2].
(4) In §4, we show that a certain isomorphism version (cf. Theorem 4.12)
of the main result of [Mzk2] can be proven over “generalized sub-p-adic
ﬁelds” (cf. Deﬁnition 4.11), which form a somewhat larger class of ﬁelds
than the class of “sub- p-adic ﬁelds” dealt with in [Mzk2]. This result is
interesting in that it isreminiscent of the main results of [Tama2], as well
as of the rigidity theorem of Mostow-Prasad for hyperbolic manifolds of
real dimension 3 (cf. the Remarks following the proof of Theorem 4.12).

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 3
Although we believe the results of §4 to be essentially new, we make no claim of
essential originality relative to the results of §1, 2, 3, which may be proven using
well-known standard techniques. Nevertheless, we believe that it is likely that, even
with respect to §1, 2, 3, the point of view of the discussion is likely to be new (and
of interest relative to understanding the main result of [Mzk2]).
Finally, before beginning our exposition, we pause to review the main result
of [Mzk2] (which is the central result to which the ideas of the present manuscript
are related). To do this, we must introduce some notation. Let Σ be a nonempty
set of prime numbers.I f K is a ﬁeld, then let us denote its absolute Galois group
Gal(
K/K)( w h e r e
K is some algebraic closure ofK)b yΓK.I f X is a geometrically
connected K-scheme, then let us recall that its algebraic fundamental groupπ1(X)
(for some choice of base-point) ﬁts into a natural exact sequence
1 → π1(X ⊗K
 K) → π(X) → ΓK → 1
Let us denote by ΔX the maximal pro-Σ quotient of π1(X ⊗K
 K) (i.e., the inverse
limit of those ﬁnite quotients whose orders are products of primes contained in Σ).
The proﬁnite group Δ
X is often referred to as the (pro-Σ) geometric fundamental
group of X. Note that since the kernel of π1(X ⊗K
 K) → Δ X is a characteristic
subgroup of π1(X ⊗K
 K), it follows that it is normal inside π1(X). Denote the
quotient of π1(X) by this normal subgroup by Π X . The proﬁnite group Π X is
often referred to as the (pro-Σ) arithmetic fundamental group of X. (When it is
necessary to specify the set of primes Σ, we will write Δ Σ
X,Π Σ
X
.) Thus, we have a
natural exact sequence
1 → Δ X → ΠX → ΓK → 1
In [Mzk2], the author proved the following result:
Theorem A. Let K be a sub-p-adic ﬁeld (i.e., a ﬁeld isomorphic to a subﬁeld
of a ﬁnitely generated ﬁeld extension of Qp), where p ∈ Σ.L e t XK be a smooth
variety over K,a n dYK a hyperbolic curve over K.L e t Homdom
K (XK,YK) be the
set of dominant K-morphisms from XK to YK.L e t Homopen
ΓK
(ΠX,ΠY ) be the set
of open, continuous group homomorphisms ΠX → ΠY over ΓK, considered up to
composition with an inner automorphism arising from Δ Y . Then the natural map
Homdom
K (XK,YK) → Homopen
ΓK (ΠX ,ΠY )
is bijective.
Remark. Theorem A as stated above is a formal consequence of “Theorem A” of
[Mzk2]. In [Mzk2], only the cases of Σ = {p}, and Σ equal to the set of all prime
numbers are discussed, but it is easy to see that the case of arbitrary Σ containing
p may be derived from the case Σ = {p} by precisely the same argument as that

4 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
used in [Mzk2] (cf. [Mzk2], the Remark following Theorem 16.5) to derive the case
of Σ equal to the set of all prime numbers from the case of Σ = {p}.
Acknowledgements: The author would like to thank A. Tamagawa and T. Tsuji
for stimulating discussions of the various topics presented in this manuscript. In
particular, the author would especially like to express his gratitude A. Tamagawa
for discussions concerning removing the hypothesis of “monodromy type” from
Theorem 4.12 in an earlier version of this manuscript. Also, the author greatly
appreciates the advice given to him by Y. Ihara (orally) concerning the Remark
following Corollary 1.2, and by M. Seppala and C. McMullen (by email) concerning
the Teichm¨uller theory used in §3.
Section 1: The T ate Conjecture as a Sort of Grothendieck Conjecture
In this §, we attempt to present what might be referred to as the most fun-
damental “prototype result” among the family of results (including the Tate and
Grothendieck Conjectures) that states that maps between varieties are “essentially
equivalent” to maps between arithmetic fundamental groups. The result given be-
low, especially in the form Corollary 1.2, is interesting in that it allows one to
express the fundamental phenomenon involved using elementary language that can,
in principle, be understood even by high school students (cf. the Remark following
Corollary 1.2). In particular, it does not require a knowledge of the notion of a Ga-
lois group or any another advanced notions, hence provides a convincing example
of how advanced mathematics can be applied to prove results which can be stated
in simple terms. Also, it may be useful for explaining to mathematicians in other
ﬁelds (who may not be familiar with Galois groups or other notions used in arith-
metic geometry) the essence of the Tate and Grothendieck Conjectures.A n o t h e r
interesting feature of Corollary 1.2 is that it shows how the Tate conjecture may
be thought of as being of the “same genre” as the Grothendieck Conjecture in that
it expresses how the isomorphism class of a curve (in this case, an elliptic curve)
may be recovered from Galois-theoretic information.
§1.1. The T ate Conjecture for non-CM Elliptic Curves
Let K be a number ﬁeld (i.e., a ﬁnite extension of Q). If E is an elliptic curve
over K,a n dN is a natural number, then let us write
K(E[N])
for the minimal ﬁnite extension ﬁeld of K over which all of the N-torsion points
are deﬁned. Note that the extension K(E[N]) will always beGalois.T h e nw e h a v e
the following elementary consequence of the “Tate Conjecture for abelian varieties
over number ﬁelds” proven in [Falt]:

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 5
Theorem 1.1. Let K be a number ﬁeld. Let E1 and E2 be elliptic curves over K
such that neither E1 nor E2 admits complex multiplication over
 Q.T h e nE1 and
E2 are isomorphic as elliptic curves over K if and only if K(E1[N]) = K(E2[N])
for all natural numbers N.
Remark. Note that the expression “K(E1[N]) = K(E2[N])” is to be understood to
mean “equal as subﬁelds of some ﬁxed algebraic closure of K.” Moreover, the sub-
stance of this expression is independent of the choice of algebraic closure precisely
because both ﬁelds in question are Galois extensions of K.
Proof. If E1 ∼= E2 over K, then it is clear that K(E1[N]) = K(E2[N]) for
all natural numbers N. Thus, let us assume that K(E1[N]) = K(E2[N]) for all
natural numbers N, and prove that E1 ∼= E2 over K. In this proof, we use the
notation and results of §1.2 below. Since we assume that K(E1[N]) = K(E2[N]),
let us denote this ﬁeld by K[N]. Also, if p is a prime number, then let us write
K[p∞ ] for the union of the K[pn], as n ranges over the positive integers. Finally,
for n ≥ 0, we denote the Galois group Gal( K[p∞ ]/K[pn]) by Γ[pn]; the center of
Γ[pn]b y ZΓ[pn]; and the quotient Γ[pn]/ZΓ[pn]b y PΓ[pn].
Let p be a prime number. Then by the semisimplicity of the Tate module,
together with the Tate conjecture (both proven in general in [Falt]; cf. also [Ser2],
IV), the fact that neither E1 nor E2 admits complex multiplication over
 Q implies
that there exists an integer n ≥ 1 such that the Galois representation on the p-
power torsion points of E1 (respectively, E2) induces an isomorphism β1 :Γ [pn] ∼=
GL[n]
2 (Zp) (respectively, β2 :Γ [pn] ∼= GL[n]
2 (Zp)), where GL[n]
2 (Zp) ⊆ GL2(Zp)i s
the subgroup of matrices that are ≡ 1 modulo pn. Since the kernel of GL[n]
2 (Zp) →
PGL[n]
2 (Zp) is easily seen to be equal to the center of GL[n]
2 (Zp), it thus follows
that β1, β2 induce isomorphisms
α1 : PΓ[pn] ∼= PGL[n]
2 (Zp); α2 : PΓ[pn] ∼= PGL[n]
2 (Zp)
Thus, in particular, by Lemma 1.3 of §1.2 below, we obtain that (after possibly
increasing n) the automorphism α
def
= α1 ◦α−1
2 of PGL[n]
2 (Zp) is deﬁned by con-
jugation by an element of PGL2(Zp). In particular, we obtain that there exists a
Zp-linear isomorphism
ψ : Tp(E1) ∼= Tp(E2)
between thep-adic Tate modules ofE1 and E2 with the property that forσ ∈ Γ[pn],
we have ψ(σ(t)) = λσσ(ψ(t)) (∀t ∈ Tp(E1)), for some λσ ∈ Zp
× which is indepen-
dent of t. On the other hand, since the determinant ofψ is clearly compatible with
the Galois actions on both sides (given by the cyclotomic character), it thus follows
(by taking determinants of both sides of the equation ψ(σ(t)) = λ
σσ(ψ(t))) that
λ2
σ = 1. Since the correspondence σ ↦→ λσ is clearly a homomorphism (hence a
character of order 2), we thus obtain that:

6 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(*) There exists a ﬁnite extension K′ of K over which the Gal(
K/K ′)-
modules Tp(E1)a n dTp(E2) become isomorphic.
(Here, K′ is the extension ofK[pn] (of degree ≤ 2) deﬁned by the kernel ofσ ↦→ λσ.
In fact, if p> 2, then this extension is trivial (since Γ[pn]i sap r o -p-group).) Thus,
by the Tate Conjecture proven in [Falt], we obtain that Hom K′ (E1,E2) ⊗Z Zp
contains an element that induces an isomorphism on p-adic Tate modules. On
the other hand, since HK′
def
= Hom K′ (E1,E2) (the module of homomorphisms
(E1)K′ → (E2)K′ over K′) is a ﬁnitely generated free Z-module of rank ≤ 1( s i n c e
E1, E2 do not have complex multiplication over
 Q), we thus obtain that HK′ is a
free Z-module of rank 1. Let ϵ ∈ HK′ be a generator of HK′ .T h e nϵ necessar-
ily corresponds to an isogeny E1 → E2 that induces an isomorphism on p-power
torsion points.
Now write H
K
def
= Hom
K(E1,E2). Then the above argument shows thatH
K is
af r e eZ-module of rank 1 with a generatorϵ that induces an isomorphism onp-power
torsion points for every prime number p. But this implies that ϵ :( E1)
K → (E2)
K
is an isomorphism, i.e., that E1 and E2 become isomorphic over
 K.
Thus, it remains to check that E1 and E2 are, in fact, isomorphic over K.
Let p ≥ 5 be a prime number which is suﬃciently large that: (i) K is absolutely
unramiﬁed at p; (ii) the Galois representations on thep-power torsion points of E1
and E2 induce isomorphisms
β1 :Γ [p0] ∼= GL2(Zp); β2 :Γ [p0] ∼= GL2(Zp)
(the existence of such p follows from the “modulo l versions” (for large l)o ft h e
semisimplicity of the Tate module, together with the Tate conjecture in [Mord],
VIII, §5 ; cf. also [Ser2], IV). Now we would like to consider the extent to which
the automorphismβ
def
= β1 ◦β−1
2 of GL2(Zp) is deﬁned by conjugation by an element
of GL2(Zp). Note that by what we did above, we know that the morphism induced
by β on PGL[n]
2 (Zp) (for some large n) is given by conjugation by some element
A ∈ GL2(Zp). Let γ : GL2(Zp) → GL2(Zp) be the automorphism of GL2(Zp)
obtained by composing β with the automorphism given by conjugation by A−1.
Thus, γ induces the identity on PGL[n]
2 (Zp). But this implies (by Lemma 1.4
below) that γ induces the identity on PGL2(Zp). In particular, it follows that
there exists a homomorphism λ : GL2(Zp) → Zp
× such that γ(σ)= λ(σ) · σ
(∀σ ∈ GL2(Zp)). Next, let us recall that sincep ≥ 5, the topological groupSL2(Zp)
has no abelian quotients(an easy exercise). Thus,λfactors through the determinant
map GL2(Zp) → Zp
×. Moreover, (cf. the argument at the beginning of the proof
involving arbitrary p) since the composites of β1, β2 with the determinant map are
given by the cyclotomic character, we obtain that λ2 = 1. In particular, we obtain
that λ is trivial on the index 2 subgroup ofGL2(Zp) of elements whose determinant
is a square. Put another way, if we write Kp for the quadratic extension of K
determined by composing the cyclotomic character Gal(
 K/K) → Zp
× (which is
surjective since K is absolutely unramiﬁed at p) with the unique surjection Zp
× ↠

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 7
Z/2Z,t h e no v e rKp, the Tate modulesTp(E1), Tp(E2) become isomorphic as Galois
modules, which implies that HomKp (E1,E2) ̸= 0. But this implies that E1 and E2
become isomorphic over Kp.
On the other hand, for distinct primes p, p′ as above, Kp, Kp′ form linearly
disjoint quadratic extensions of K (as can be seen by considering the ramiﬁcation
at p, p′). Thus, the fact that both Gal(
 K/Kp)a n dG a l (
K/Kp′ ) act trivially on
Hom
K(E1,E2) implies that Gal(
K/K) acts trivially on Hom
K(E1,E2), so E1 ∼= E2
over K, as desired. ⃝
Remark. The above proof beneﬁted from discussions with A. Tamagawa and T.
Tsuji.
Remark. Note that in the above proof (cf. also the arguments of §1.2 below), we
use in an essential way the strong rigidity propertiesof the simple p-adic Lie group
PGL2(Zp). Such rigidity properties are not shared by abelian Lie groups such as
Zp; this is why it was necessary to assume in Theorem 1.1 that the elliptic curves
in question do not admit complex multiplication.
Corollary 1.2. There is a ﬁnite set CM ⊆ Z such that if E1 and E2 are arbitrary
elliptic curves overQ whose j-invariants j(E1), j(E2) do not belong toCM,t h e nE1
and E2 are isomorphic as elliptic curves overQ if and only ifQ(E1[N]) = Q(E2[N])
for all natural numbers N.
Proof. In light of Theorem 1.1, it suﬃces to show that there are only ﬁnitely
many possibilities (all of which are integral — cf., e.g., [Shi], p. 108, Theorem 4.4)
for the j-invariant of an elliptic curve over Q which has complex multiplication
over
Q. But this follows from the ﬁniteness of the number of imaginary quadratic
extensions of Q with class number one (cf., e.g., [Stk]), together with the theory
of [Shi] (cf. [Shi], p. 123, Theorem 5.7, (i), (ii)). (Note that we also use here the
elementary facts that: (i) the class group of any order surjects onto the class group
of the maximal order; (ii) in a given imaginary quadratic extension of Q, there are
only ﬁnitely many orders with trivial class group.) ⃝
Remark. According to an (apparently) unpublished manuscript of J.-P. Serre
([Ser3]) whose existence was made known to the author by Y. Ihara, the set CM
of Corollary 1.2, i.e., the list of rationalj-invariants of elliptic curves with complex
multiplication, is as follows:
d =1 , f =1= ⇒ j = j(i)=2
6 · 33
d =1 , f =2= ⇒ j = j(2i)=( 2 · 3 · 11)3
d =2 , f =1= ⇒ j = j(
√
−2) = (22 · 5)3, ([Weber], p. 721)
d =3 , f =1= ⇒ j = j( −1+ √
 −3
2 )=0

8 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
d =3 , f =2= ⇒ j = j(
√
−3) = 24 · 33 · 53, ([Weber], p. 721)
d =3 , f =3= ⇒ j = j( −1+3 √
 −3
2 )= −3 · 215 · 53, ([Weber], p. 462)
d =7 , f =1= ⇒ j = j( −1+ √
 −7
2 )= −33 · 53, ([Weber], p. 460)
d =7 , f =2= ⇒ j = j(
√
−7) = (3 · 5 · 17)3, ([Weber], p. 475)
d =1 1, f =1= ⇒ j = j( −1+ √
 −11
2 )= −215, ([Weber], p. 462)
d =1 9, f =1= ⇒ j = −(25 · 3)3, ([Weber], p. 462)
d =4 3, f =1= ⇒ j = −(26 · 3 · 5)3, ([Weber], p. 462)
d =6 7, f =1= ⇒ j = −(25 · 3 · 5 · 11)3, ([Weber], p. 462)
d = 163, f =1= ⇒ j = −(26 · 3 · 5 · 23 · 29)3, ([Weber], p. 462)
(where Q(
√
−d) is the imaginary quadratic extension of Q containing the order in
question, f is the conductor of the order, and the reference given in parentheses is
for the values of the invariants “ f”a n d“f1” of [Weber], which are related to the
j-invariant as follows: j =( f24 − 16)3/f24 =( f24
1 + 16)3/f24
1 ).
Remark. Thus, if one deﬁnes elliptic curves overQ using cubic equations, constructs
the group law on elliptic curves by considering the intersection of the cubic with
various lines, and interprets the notion of isomorphism of elliptic curves (overQ)t o
mean “being deﬁned by the same cubic equation, up to coordinate transformations,”
then Corollary 1.2 may be expressed as follows:
Except for the case of ﬁnitely many exceptional j-invariants, two elliptic
curves E
1, E2 over Q are isomorphic if and only if for each natural number
N, the coordinates (∈ C) necessary to deﬁne the N-torsion points of E1
generate the same “subﬁeld of C” — i.e., “collection of complex numbers
closed under addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division” — as the
coordinates necessary to deﬁne the N-torsion points of E2.
(where, of course, thej-invariant is deﬁned as a polynomial in the coeﬃcients of the
cubic). In this form, the essential phenomenon at issue in the Tate or Grothendieck
Conjectures may be understood even by high school students or mathematicians
unfamiliar with Galois theory.
§1.2. Some Pro-p Group Theory
Let n ≥ 1 be an integer. In this §, let us denote by PGL2 the algebraic
group (deﬁned over Z) obtained by forming the quotient of GL2 by Gm (where
Gm ↪→ GL2 is the standard embedding by scalars), and by

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 9
PGL[n]
2 (Zp) ⊆ PGL2(Zp)
the subgroup of elements which are ≡ 1 modulo pn.L e tu sw r i t epgl2(Zp) for the
quotient of the Lie algebra M2(Zp) (of 2 by 2 matrices with Zp coeﬃcients) by
the scalars Zp ⊆ M2(Zp). Thus, pgl2(Zp) ⊆ pgl2(Zp) ⊗Zp Qp = pgl2(Qp). Write
pgl[n]
2 (Zp) ⊆ pgl2(Zp) for the submodule which is the image of matrices in M2(Zp)
which are ≡ 0 modulo pn.T h u s ,f o rn suﬃciently large, pgl[n]
2 (Zp) maps bijectively
onto PGL[n]
2 (Zp) via the exponential map (cf. [Ser1], Chapter V, §7).
Lemma 1.3. Let α : PGL[n]
2 (Zp) → PGL[n]
2 (Zp) be an automorphism of the
proﬁnite topological group PGL[n]
2 (Zp) such that α(PGL[m]
2 (Zp)) = PGL[m]
2 (Zp)
for all m ≥ n. Then there exists an element A ∈ PGL2(Zp) such that for some
m ≥ n, the restriction α|PGL[m]
2 (Zp) is given by conjugation by A.
Proof. Let us write
A : pgl2(Qp) → pgl2(Qp)
for the morphism on Lie algebras induced by α. By [Ser1], Chapter V, §7, 9, after
possibly replacing n by a larger n, we may assume that α is the homomorphism
obtained by exponentiating A. Moreover, by the well-known theory of the Lie
algebra pgl2(Qp), it follows that A may be obtained by conjugating by some A′ ∈
PGL2(Qp). (Indeed, this may be proven by noting thatA induces an automorphism
of the “variety of Borel subalgebras of pgl2(Qp).” Since this variety is simply P1
Qp ,
we thus get an automorphism of P1
Qp , hence an element of PGL2(Qp), as desired.)
On the other hand, it follows immediately from the structure theory of ﬁnitely
generated Zp-modules that A′ may be written as a product
A′ = C1 · A′′ · C2
where C1,C2 ∈ PGL2(Zp), and A′′ is deﬁned by a matrix of the form
( λ1 0
0 λ2
)
,
where λ1,λ2 ∈ Qp
×.
Now observe that the fact thatA arises from an automorphism of PGL[n]
2 (Zp)
implies that A induces an automorphism of pgl[n]
2 (Zp) (cf. the discussion at the
beginning of this§). Since conjugation byC1 and C2 clearly induces automorphisms
of pgl[n]
2 (Zp), it thus follows that conjugation by A′′ induces an automorphism of
pgl[n]
2 (Zp). Now, by considering, for instance, upper triangular matrices with zeroes
along the diagonal, one sees thatA′′ can only induce an automorphism ofpgl[n]
2 (Zp)
if λ1 = λ2 · u,w h e r eu ∈ Zp
×.L e t A
def
= λ−1
1 · A′. Then clearly A ∈ PGL2(Zp),

10 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
and conjugation by A induces A. Thus, by using the exponential map, we obtain
that for some m ≥ n, the restriction α|PGL[m]
2 (Zp) is given by conjugation by A,a s
desired. ⃝
The following lemma was pointed out to the author by A. Tamagawa:
Lemma 1.4. Let α : PGL2(Zp) → PGL2(Zp) be an automorphism of the proﬁ-
nite topological group PGL2(Zp) such that for some integer m ≥ 1, the restriction
α|PGL[m]
2 (Zp) is the identity. Then α itself is the identity.
Proof. First let us show that α is the identity on the image in PGL2(Zp)o f
matrices of the form
(1 λ
01
)
(where λ ∈ Zp). For m ≥ 0 an integer, write
Um ⊆ PGL2(Zp) for the subgroup of images in PGL2(Zp) of matrices of the form
( 1 λ
01
)
where λ ∈ pm ·Zp. Since, by hypothesis,α preserves Um for somem, it follows thatα
preserves thecentralizerZ(Um)o f Um in PGL2(Zp). On the other hand, one checks
easily that Z(Um)= U0.T h u s ,α preserves U0, i.e., induces an automorphism of
the topological group U0 ∼= Zp which is the identity on pm · Zp.S i n c eZp is torsion
free, it thus follows thatα is the identity onU0, as desired. Moreover, let us observe
that since conjugation commutes with the operation of taking centralizers, one sees
immediately that the above argument implies also that α is the identity on all
conjugates of U0 in PGL2(Zp).
Next, let us observe that α is the identity on the subgroup B ⊆ PGL2(Zp)
consisting of images of matrices of the form:
(μ1 λ
0 μ2
)
(where λ ∈ Zp, μ1,μ2 ∈ Zp
×). Indeed, since B is generated byU0 and the subgroup
T ⊆ PGL2(Zp) of images of matrices of the form
(μ 0
01
)
, it suﬃces to see that
α is the identity on T.B u t T acts faithfully by conjugation on U0,a n dα is the
identity on U0. This implies that α is the identity on T, hence on B.M o r e o v e r ,
as in the previous paragraph, this argument implies that α is the identity on all
conjugates of B in PGL2(Zp). Since PGL2(Zp) is generated by the union of the
conjugates of B, it thus follows that α is the identity on PGL2(Zp). ⃝

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 11
Section 2: Hyperbolic Curves as their own “Anabelian Albanese V arieties”
In this §, we present an application (Corollary 2.1) of the main theorem of
[Mzk2] which is interesting in that it is purely algebro-geometric, i.e., it makes no
mention of Galois actions or other arithmetic phenomena.
§2.1. A Corollary of the Main Theorem of [Mzk2]
In this §, we ﬁx a nonempty set of prime numbers Σ, and use the notation of
the discussion of Theorem A in the Introduction. Now Theorem A has the following
immediate consequence:
Corollary 2.1. Let K be a ﬁeld of characteristic 0.L e t C be a hyperbolic
curve over K,a n dl e tψ : X → Y be a morphism of (geometrically integral)
smooth varieties over K which induces an isomorphism Δ
X ∼= Δ Y . Let us write
“Homdom
K (−,C )” for the set of dominant K-morphisms from “ −”t o C. Then the
natural morphism of sets
Homdom
K (Y,C ) → Homdom
K (X,C )
induced by ψ : X → Y is a bijection.
Proof. By a standard technique involving the use of subﬁelds of K which are
ﬁnitely generated over Q, we reduce immediately to the case where K is ﬁnitely
generated over Q. (We recall for the convenience of the reader that the essence of
this technique lies in the fact that since we are working with K-schemes of ﬁnite
type, all schemes and morphisms between schemes are deﬁned by ﬁnitely many
polynomials with coeﬃcients in K, hence may be deﬁned over any subﬁeld of K
that contains these coeﬃcients (of which there are only ﬁnitely many!).)
Next, observe that since the morphism ψ : X → Y induces an isomorphism
between the respective geometric fundamental groups, it follows from the exact
sequences reviewed in the Introduction that it induces an isomorphism Π
X ∼= ΠY .
By Theorem A of the Introduction, it thus follows that the morphism of sets under
consideration — i.e., Hom
dom
K (Y,C ) → Homdom
K (X,C ) — is naturally isomorphic
to the morphism of sets given by
Homopen
ΓK (ΠY ,ΠC) → Homopen
ΓK (ΠX,ΠC)
which is bijective. This completes the proof. ⃝
Remark. As stated above, Corollary 2.1 is interesting in that it is apurely algebro-
geometric application of Theorem A, i.e., it makes no mention of Galois actions or
other arithmetic phenomena. The observation that Corollary 2.1 holds ﬁrst arose in
discussions between the author and A. Tamagawa. Typical examples of morphisms
ψ : X → Y as in Corollary 2.1 are:

12 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(1) the case where X → Y is a ﬁber bundle in, say, the ´etale topology, with
proper, simply connected ﬁbers;
(2) the case where Y ⊆ Pn
k is a closed subvariety of dimension ≥ 3 in some
projective space, and X is obtained by intersecting Y with a hyperplane
in Pn
k .
In these cases, the fact that the resulting morphism on geometric fundamental
groups is an isomorphism follows from the long exact homotopy sequence of a ﬁber
bundle in the ﬁrst case (cf. [SGA1], X, Corollary 1.4), and Lefshetz-type theorems
(cf. [SGA2], XII, Corollary 3.5) in the second case. Since this consequence of
Theorem A (i.e., Corollary 2.1) is purely algebro-geometric, it is natural to ask if
one can give a purely algebro-geometric proof of Corollary 2.1.I n §2.2 below, we
give a partial answer to this question.
§2.2. A Partial Generalization to Finite Characteristic
Let k be an algebraically closed ﬁeld.L e tC be a proper hyperbolic curveover
k. Suppose that we are also given a connected, smooth closed subvariety
Y ⊆ P
n
k
of projective space, of dimension ≥ 3, together with a hyperplane H ⊆ Pn
k such
that the scheme-theoretic intersection X
def
= H ⋂ Y is still smooth. Note that X is
necessarily connected (cf. [SGA2], XII, Corollary 3.5) and of dimension ≥ 2.
If k is ofcharacteristic p> 0, and S is ak-scheme, then let us write ΦS : S → S
for the Frobenius morphism on S (given by raising regular functions on S to the
power p). If k is of characteristic 0, then we make the convention that ΦS : S → S
denotes the identity morphism.I f T is a k-schemes, then we deﬁne
HomΦ(T,C )
to be the inductive limit of the system
Homdom
k (T,C ) → Homdom
k (T,C ) → ... → Homdom
k (T,C ) → ...
where the arrows are those induced by applying the functor Homdom
k (−,C )t ot h e
morphism ΦT . Thus, in particular, if k is of characteristic 0, then HomΦ(T,C )=
Homdom
k (T,C ).
Now we have the following partial generalization of Corollary 2.1 of§2.1 to the
case of varieties over a ﬁeld of arbitrary characteristic:
Theorem 2.2. Let k, C, X,a n dY be as above. Then the natural morphism
HomΦ(Y,C ) → HomΦ(X,C )

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 13
induced by the inclusion X↪ → Y is a bijection.
Proof. Let us denote by AX, AY ,a n dAC the Albanese varieties of X, Y ,a n d
C, respectively. We refer to [Lang], Chapter II, §3, for basic facts concerning
Albanese varieties. Thus, the inclusion X↪ → Y induces a morphism AX → AY .I
claim that this morphism is a purely inseparable isogeny. Indeed, by various well-
known Leftshetz theorem-type results (cf., [SGA2], XII, Corollary 3.5), the inclusion
X↪ → Y induces an isomorphism π1(X) ∼= π1(Y ); since (by the universal property
of the Albanese variety as the “minimal abelian variety to which the original variety
maps”) we have surjections π
1(X) ↠ π1(AX), π1(Y ) ↠ π1(AY ), we thus obtain
that π1(AX ) ↠ π1(AY ) is a surjection. Moreover, since X → AX, Y → AY induce
isomorphisms on the respectively ´etale ﬁrst cohomology groups with Zl-coeﬃcients
(where l is prime to the characteristic ofk), we thus obtain thatπ1(AX ) ↠ π1(AY )
is a surjection which is an isomorphism on the respective maximal pro-l quotients.
Now it follows from the elementary theory of abelian varieties that this implies that
AX → AY is a isogeny of degree a power ofp. Finally, applying again the fact that
π1(AX) ↠ π1(AY )i ssurjective (i.e., even on maximal pro-p quotients), we conclude
(again from the elementary theory of abelian varieties) that this isogeny hastrivial
´etale part, hence is purely inseparable, as desired. Note that since AX → AY is an
isogeny, it follows in particular that it is faithfully ﬂat .
Now let γX : X → C be a dominant k-morphism.W r i t eαX : AX → AC for
the induced morphism on Albanese varieties. If γX arises from some γY : Y → C,
then this γY is unique. Indeed, γY is determined by its associated αY ,a n dt h e
composite of αY with AX → AY is given by αX (which is uniquely determined
by γX). Thus, the fact that αY is uniquely determined follows from the fact that
AX → AY is faithfully ﬂat. This completes the proof of the claim, and hence of
the injectivity portion of the bijectivity assertion in Theorem 2.2.
Now suppose that γX is arbitrary (i.e., does not necessarily arise from some
γY ). The surjectivity portion of the bijectivity assertion in Theorem 2.2 amounts
to showing that, up to replacing γX by the composite of γX with some power of
ΦX, γX necessarily arises from some γY : Y → C. Now although αX : AX → AC
itself might not factor throughAY ,s i n c eAX → AY is purely inseparable, it follows
that the composite ofαX with some power of ΦAX will factor through AY .T h u s ,i f
we replace γX by the composite of γX with some power of ΦX,t h e nαX will factor
(uniquely) through AY . Let us denote this morphism by αY : AY → AC.T h u s ,i n
order to complete the proof of surjectivity, it suﬃces to show:
(*) The restriction αY |Y of αY to Y (relative to the natural morphism
Y → AY ) maps into the subvariety C ⊆ AC.
Before continuing, we observe the following:
(1) The assertion (*) for characteristic zero k follows immediately from the
assertion (*) fork of ﬁnite characteristic. Indeed, this follows via the usual
argument of replacing k ﬁrst by a ﬁnitely generated Z-algebra, and then

14 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
reducing modulo various primes. Thus, in the following, we assume the k
is of characteristic p> 0.
(2) The assertion (*) will follow if we can show that the restriction αY |
/CQ
Y
(where we write ˆY for the completion of Y along X) maps into C ⊆ AC.
Now let us show that (up to possibly composing γX again with a power of Frobe-
nius), γX extends to ˆY .I f I is the sheaf of ideals on Y that deﬁnes the closed
subscheme X ⊆ Y , then let us write Yn
def
= V (In) ⊆ Y for the n-th inﬁnitesimal
neighborhood of X in Y ,a n dJ
def
= I|X ∼= OX(−1). Write T for the pull-back of
the tangent bundle of C to X via γX.S i n c eT −1 is generated by global sections,
it thus follows that T −1 ⊗J −1 is ample, hence, by Serre duality (cf., e.g., [Harts],
Chapter III, Theorem 7.6), together with the fact that dim( X) ≥ 2, that there
exists a natural number N such that
H1(X, T ⊗pN
⊗J ⊗pN
)=0
Note that this implies that for all n ≥ pN ,w eh a v e :
H1(X, T ⊗pN
⊗J ⊗n)=0
(Indeed, it suﬃces to assume that n>p N.T h e n s i n c eJ −1 ∼= OX(1) is very
ample, it follows that there exists a section s ∈ Γ(X, OX (1)) whose zero locus
Z
def
= V (s) ⊆ X is smooth of dimension ≥ 1. Thus, s deﬁnes an exact sequence
0 →T ⊗pN
⊗J ⊗n →T ⊗pN
⊗J ⊗n−1 →T ⊗pN
⊗J ⊗n−1|Z → 0
whose associated long exact cohomology sequence yields:
H0(Z, T ⊗pN
⊗J ⊗n−1|Z) → H1(X, T ⊗pN
⊗J ⊗n) → H1(X, T ⊗pN
⊗J ⊗n−1)
But H0(Z, T ⊗pN
⊗J ⊗n−1|Z)=0s i n c eT ⊗pN
⊗J ⊗n−1|Z is the inverse of an ample
line bundle on a smooth scheme of dimension≥ 1, while H1(X, T ⊗pN
⊗J ⊗n−1)=0
by the induction hypothesis.)
Next, observe that ΦN
YpN : YpN → YpN factors throughX (since ΦN
YpN is induced
by raising functions to the pN -th power). Thus, if we compose γX : X → C with
ΦN
X, we see that this composite extends to a morphism YpN → C. Moreover, since
the pull-back toX via this composite of the tangent bundle onC is given byT ⊗pN
,
it follows that the obstruction to extending this composite to Yn+1 for n ≥ pN is
given by an element of the cohomology group
H1(X, T ⊗pN
⊗J ⊗n)

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 15
which (by the above discussion concerning cohomology groups) is zero. Thus, in
summary, if we replace the given γX by its composite with Φ N
X, the resulting γX
extends to a morphism ˆY → C. This completes the proof of (*), and hence of the
entire proof of Theorem 2.2. ⃝
Remark. The above proof beneﬁted from discussions with A. Tamagawa.
Remark. Note that the other case discussed in the Remark at the end of §2.1,
i.e., the case of a ﬁber bundle with proper, simply connected ﬁbers also admits
a purely algebro-geometric proof: namely, it follows immediately from the theory
of Albanese varieties that there do not exist any nonconstant morphisms from a
simply connected smooth proper variety to an abelian variety.
Remark. The role played by the Albanese variety in the proof of Theorem 2.2 given
above suggests that the property proven in Corollary 2.1 and Theorem 2.2 might be
thought of as asserting that a hyperbolic curve is, so to speak, its own “anabelian
Albanese variety.” This is the reason for the title of §2.
Section 3: Discrete Real Anabelian Geometry
The original motivation for the p-adic result of [Mzk2] came from the (dif-
ferential) geometry of the upper half-plane uniformization of a hyperbolic curve.
This point of view — and, especially, the related idea that K¨ ahler geometry at
archimedean primes should be regarded as analogous to Frobenius actions atp-adic
primes — is discussed in detail in [Mzk4], Introduction (especially §0.10; cf. also
the Introduction of [Mzk3]). In the present §, we attempt to make this motivation
more rigorous by presenting the real analogues of various theorems/conjecturesof
anabelian geometry. The substantive mathematics here — i.e., essentially the ge-
ometry of the Siegel upper half-plane and Teichm¨ uller space — is not new, but
has been well-known to topologists, Teichm¨uller theorists, and symmetric domain
theorists for some time. What is (perhaps) new is the formulation or point of
view presented here, namely, that these geometric facts should be regarded as real
analogues of Grothendieck’s conjectured anabelian geometry.
§3.1. Real Complex Manifolds
We begin with the following purely analytic deﬁnition: Let X be a complex
manifold and ιan anti-holomorphic involution (i.e., automorphism of order 2) of
X.
Deﬁnition 3.1. Ap a i rs u c ha s(X,ι) will be referred to as a real complex
manifold.I f X has the structure of an abelian variety whose origin is ﬁxed by ι,
then (X,ι) will be referred to as a real abelian variety.I fd i m
C(X) = 1, then (X,ι)

16 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
will be referred to as areal Riemann surface. A real Riemann surface (X,ι) will be
called hyperbolic if the universal covering space of X is isomorphic (as a Riemann
surface) to the upper half-plane H
def
= {z ∈ C | Im(z) > 0}.
Remark. Note that ifXR is a smooth algebraic variety overR,t h e nXR(C) equipped
with the anti-holomorphic involution deﬁned by complex conjugation deﬁnes a real
complex manifold (X,ι). Moreover, one checks easily that XR is uniquely deter-
mined by ( X,ι). Conversely, any real complex manifold ( X,ι) such that X is
projective arises from a unique algebraic variety XR over R. Indeed, this follows
easily from “Chow’s Theorem” (that any projective complex manifold is necessarily
algebraic) and the (related) fact that any holomorphic isomorphism between pro-
jective algebraic varieties (in this case, the given X and its complex conjugate) is
necessarily algebraic. Thus, in summary, one motivating reason for the introduction
of Deﬁnition 3.1 is that it allows one to describe the notion of a (proper, smooth)
algebraic variety over R entirely in terms of complex manifolds and analytic maps.
Remark. In the case of one complex dimension, one does not even need to assume
projectivity: That is, any real Riemann surface (X,ι) such thatX is algebraic arises
from a unique algebraic curve X
R over R. Indeed, this follows easily by observing
that any holomorphic isomorphism between Riemann surfaces associated to com-
plex algebraic curves is necessarily algebraic. (Note that this may be proven by
noting that any such isomorphism extends naturally to the “one-point compactiﬁ-
cations” of the Riemann surfaces (which have natural algebraic structures), hence
is necessarily algebraizable.) It is not clear to the author whether or not this can
be generalized to higher dimensions.
In the following, we shall consider various groupsG with natural augmentations
G → Gal(C/R). In this sort of situation, we shall denote the inverse image of the
identity element (respectively, the complex conjugation element) in Gal( C/R)b y
G
+ (respectively, G−).
If X is a complex manifold, then we shall denote by
Aut(X) → Gal(C/R)
the group of automorphisms ofX which areeither holomorphic or anti-holomorphic,
equipped with its natural augmentation (which sends holomorphic (respectively,
anti-holomorphic) automorphisms to the identity (respectively, complex conjuga-
tion element) in Gal(C/R)). Thus,
Aut
+(X),Aut−(X) ⊆ Aut(X)
denote the subsets of holomorphic and anti-holomorphic automorphisms, respec-
tively. In many cases, X will come equipped with a natural Riemannian metric

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 17
which is preserved by Aut(X). The principal examples of this situation are the
following:
Example 3.2. (The Siegel Upper Half-Plane) Let g ≥ 1 be an integer. Let
us write
Hg
def
= {Z ∈ Mg(C) | Z = tZ;I m (Z) > 0}
(where “t” denotes the “transpose matrix,” and “> 0” is to be understood to mean
“positive deﬁnite”) for the Siegel upper half-plane.( T h u s ,H1 is the usual upper
half-plane H.) We shall regardHg as acomplex manifold(equipped with the obvious
complex structure). Set Jg
def
=
( 0 Ig
−Ig 0
)
∈ M2g(R)( w h e r eIg ∈ Mg(R)i st h e
identity matrix). Write
GSp2g
def
= {M ∈ M2g(R) | M · J · tM = η· J, η ∈ R×}
for the group of symplectic similitudes. Thus, we have a natural character
χ : GSp2g → Gal(C/R)
that maps an M ∈ GSp2g to the sign of η (where η is as in the above deﬁni-
tion of GSp2g). In particular, χ deﬁnes GSp+
2g, GSp−
2g. Then we have a natural
homomorphism
φ : GSp2g → Aut(Hg)
given by letting M =
( AB
CD
)
∈ GSp2g act on Z ∈ Hg by
Z ↦→ (AZχ(M) + B)(CZχ(M) + D)−1
Thus, φ is compatible with the augmentations to Gal( C/R). Now it is clear that
the kernel of φ is given by the scalars R× ⊆ GSp2g.I n f a c t ,φ is surjective.
Indeed, this is well-known when +’s are added to both sides (i.e., for holomorphic
automorphisms — cf., e.g., [Maass], §4, Theorem 2). On the other hand, since φ is
compatible with the augmentations to Gal(C/R), the surjectivity of φ thus follows
from the “5-Lemma.” Thus, in summary, we have a natural isomorphism
GSp2g/R× ∼= Aut(Hg)
Moreover, the space Hg admits a natural Riemannian metric. Relative to this met-
ric, any two pointsZ1,Z2 of Hg can be joined by aunique geodesic(cf. [Maass], §3,

18 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Theorem). Moreover, this Riemannian metric is preserved by the action of GSp2g
on Hg. (Indeed, this follows from [Maass], §4, Theorem 1, in the holomorphic case.
As for the anti-holomorphic case, it suﬃces to check that the metric is preserved
by a single anti-holomorphic map. But this is clear from [Maass], §4, Theorem 1,
for the map Z ↦→−
Z.)
Example 3.3. (T eichm¨ uller Space) Let g,r ≥ 0 be integers such that 2g − 2+
r> 0. Let us denote by Tg,r the Teichm¨uller space of genus g Riemann surfaces
with r marked points.T h u s ,Tg,r has a natural structure of complex manifold.
Moreover, Tg,r is equipped with a natural K¨ahler metric, called theWeil-Petersson
metric, whose associated Riemannian metric has the property that any two points
t1,t2 ∈ Tg,r may be joined by a unique geodesic(cf. [Wolp], §5.1).
Write
Modg,r
for thefull modular group, i.e., the group of homotopy classes of homeomorphisms of
a topological surface of type (g,r ) onto itself. Note that Modg,r is equipped with an
augmentation Modg,r → Gal(C/R) given by considering whether or not the homeo-
morphism preserves the orientation of the surface. The quotientTg,r/Mod+
g,r (in the
sense of stacks) may be identiﬁed with the moduli stack Mg,r of hyperbolic curves
of type (g,r )o v e rC, and the Weil-Petersson metric descends to Mg,r.M o r e o v e r ,
the Riemannian metric arising from the Weil-Petersson metric onMg,r is preserved
by complex conjugation. Indeed, this follows easily, for instance, from the deﬁnition
of the Weil-Petersson metric in terms of integration of the square of the absolute
value of a quadratic diﬀerential (on the Riemann surface in question) divided by
the (1,1)-form given by the Poincar´e metric (on the Riemann surface in question)
— cf., e.g, [Wolp], §1.4.
If (g,r )i sn o texceptional (i.e., not equal to the cases (0,3), (0,4), (1,1), (1,2),
or (2,0)), then it is known (by a theorem of Royden — cf., e.g., [Gard], §9.2,
Theorem 2) that one has a natural isomorphism
Modg,r ∼= Aut(Tg,r)
which is compatible with the natural augmentations to Gal(C/R). Now I claim that
(at least if (g,r ) is nonexceptional, then) Aut(Tg,r) preserves (the Riemannian met-
ric arising from) the Weil-Petersson metric . Indeed, since Tg,r/Mod+
g,r = Mg,r,
and the Weil-Petersson metric descends to Mg,r, it thus follows that Mod+
g,r pre-
serves the Weil-Petersson metric. Thus, the claim follows from the fact (observed
above) that (the Riemannian metric arising from) the Weil-Petersson metric on
M
g,r is preserved by complex conjugation.
Now let us return to our discussion of an arbitraryreal complex manifold(X,ι).
By analogy with the case when ( X,ι) arises from a real algebraic variety (cf. the

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 19
Remark following Deﬁnition 3.1), we will refer to the ﬁxed point locus of ιas the
real locus of (X,ι), and use the notation
X(R)
for this locus. Observe that X(R) is necessarily a real analytic submanifold of
X of real dimension equal to the complex dimension of X. (Indeed, this follows
immediately by considering the local structure ofιat a pointx ∈ X(R).) Moreover,
at anyx ∈ X(R), the involutionιinduces asemi-linear (i.e., with respect to complex
conjugation) automorphism ιx of order 2 of the complex vector space Tx(X) (i.e.,
the tangent space to the complex manifold X at x). That is to say, ιx deﬁnes a
real structure Tx(X)R ⊆ Tx(X)R ⊗R C = Tx(X)o n Tx(X). Put another way, this
real structure Tx(X)R is simply the tangent space to the real analytic submanifold
X(R) ⊆ X.
Since ιacts without ﬁxed points on X\X(R), it follows that the quotient of
X\X(R) by the action of ιdeﬁnes a real analytic manifold over which X\X(R)
forms an unramiﬁed double cover. In the following, in order to analyze the action
of ιon all of X, we would like to consider the quotient of X by the action of ιin
the sense of real analytic stacks. Let us denote this quotient by X
ι.T h u s ,w eh a v e
an unramiﬁed double cover
X → Xι
which extends the cover discussed above overX\X(R).
The Galois group of this double cover (which is isomorphic to Z/2Z)m a yb e
identiﬁed with the Galois group Gal(C/R). Thus, this double cover induces a short
exact sequence of fundamental groups
1 → π1(X) → π1(Xι) → Gal(C/R) → 1
where we omit base-points, since they are inessential to the following discussion.
(Here, by “π1” we mean the usual (discrete) topological fundamental group in the
sense of algebraic topology.)
Now write ˜X → X for the universal covering space of X.T h u s , ˜X also
has a natural structure of complex manifold, and ιinduces an anti-holomorphic
automorphism ˜ι(not necessarily of order 2!) of ˜X, which is uniquely determined
up to composition with the covering transformations of˜X → X.S i n c e˜X is also the
universal cover of the real analytic stackXι, it thus follows that by considering the
covering transformations of the covering ˜X → Xι, we get a natural homomorphism
π1(Xι) → Aut( ˜X)
which is compatible with the natural projections of both sides to Gal(C/R).

20 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Thus, if, for instance, ( X,ι)i sa hyperbolic real Riemann surface,t h e nb y
Example 3.2, there is a natural isomorphism Aut( ˜X) ∼= PGL2(R)= GSp2/R×
(well-deﬁned up to conjugation by an element of PGL+
2 (R)). Thus, we obtain a
natural representation
ρX : π1(Xι) → PGL2(R)
which is compatible with the natural projections of both sides to Gal(C/R).
Deﬁnition 3.4. Let (X,ι) be a hyperbolic real Riemann surface. Then the
representation
ρX : π1(Xι) → PGL2(R)
(which is deﬁned up to composition with conjugation by an element of PGL+
2 (R))
just constructed will be referred to as the canonical representation of(X,ι).
Remark. The point of view of Deﬁnition 3.4 is discussed in [Mzk3], §1, “Real
Curves,” although the formulation presented there is somewhat less elegant.
§3.2. Fixed Points of Anti-Holomorphic Involutions
Let T be a (nonempty) complex manifold which is also equipped with asmooth
Riemannian metric. Let us also assume that the Riemannian metric on T satisﬁes
the following property:
(*) For any two distinct points t1,t2 ∈ T, there exists a unique geodesic
joining t1 and t2.
Then we have the following result, which is fundamental to the theory of the present
§3:
Lemma 3.5. Let T be a (nonempty)complex manifold equipped with asmooth
Riemannian metric satisfying the condition (*). Let ιT : T → T be an anti-
holomorphic involution of T which preserves this Riemannian metric. Then the
ﬁxed point set FιT
def
= {t ∈ T | ιT (t)= t} of ιT is a nonempty, connected real
analytic submanifold of T of real dimension equal to the complex dimension ofT.
Proof. By the discussion of §3.1, it follows that it suﬃces to prove that ιT is
nonempty and connected. First, we prove nonemptiness. Let t1 ∈ T be any point
of T, and set t2
def
= ιT (t1). If t1 = t2,t h e nt1 ∈ FιT , so we are done. If t1 ̸= t2,t h e n
let γbe the unique geodesicjoining t1, t2. Then since the subset{t1,t2} is preserved
by ιT , it follows that γ is also preserved by ιT . Thus, it follows in particular that
the midpoint t of γ is preserved by ιT , i.e., that t ∈ FιT ,s o FιT is nonempty as
desired. Connectedness follows similarly: If t1,t2 ∈ FιT , then the unique geodesicγ

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 21
joining t1, t2 is also clearly ﬁxed by ιT , i.e., γ ⊆ FιT ,s o FιT is pathwise connected.
⃝
Remark. The idea for this proof (using the Weil-Petersson metric in the case of
Teichm¨uller space) is essentially due to Wolpert ([Wolp]), and was related to the
author by C. McMullen. We remark that this idea has been used to give a solution
of the Nielsen Realization Problem(cf. the Introduction of [Wolp]). It is easiest to
see what is going on by thinking about what happens in the case whenT = H (the
upper half-plane) equipped with thePoincar´e metric
dx2+dy2
y2 . Also, we remark that
in the case whenT = P1
C, both the hypothesis and the conclusion of Lemma 3.5 are
false! (That is, the hypothesis is false because there will always exist “conjugate
points,” and the conclusion is false because it is easy to construct examples of
anti-holomorphic involutions without ﬁxed points.)
Now assume that (X,ι)i sa n yreal complex manifold equipped with a smooth
Riemannian metric (i.e.,X is equipped with a smooth Riemannian metric preserved
by ι) such that the induced Riemannian metric on the universal cover T
def
= ˜X
satisﬁes (*). Let Y ⊆ X(R)b ea connected component of the real analytic manifold
X(R). Then since ιacts trivially on Y , the quotient ofY by the action ofιforms a
real analytic stack Y ι whose associated coarse space is Y itself, and which ﬁts into
a commutative diagram:
Y −→ Y ι
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
X −→ X
ι
Moreover, the mappingY ι → Y (where we think ofY as the coarse space associated
to the stack Y ι) deﬁnes a splitting of the exact sequence:
1 → π1(Y ) → π1(Y ι) → Gal(C/R) → 1
hence a homomorphism Gal(C/R) → π1(Y ι). If we compose this homomorphism
with the natural homomorphism π1(Y ι) → π1(Xι), then we get a morphism
αY : Gal(C/R) → π1(Xι)
naturally associated to Y , which is well-deﬁned up to composition with an inner
autormorphism of π1(X). In particular, the image of complex conjugation under
αY deﬁnes a conjugacy class of involutions ιY of π1(Xι). Thus, to summarize, we
have associated to each connected componentY ⊆ X(R) of the real locus of (X,ι)
a conjugacy class of involutions ιY in π1(Xι).
Now we have the following immediate consequence of Lemma 3.5:

22 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Theorem 3.6. (“General Discrete Real Section Conjecture”) Let (X,ι)
be a real complex manifold equipped with a smooth Riemannian metric (i.e.,X
is equipped with a smooth Riemannian metric preserved byι) such that the induced
Riemannian metric on the universal cover ˜X satisﬁes (*). Then the correspondence
Y ↦→ ιY deﬁnes a bijection
π0(X(R)) ∼= HomGal(C/R)(Gal(C/R),π1(Xι))
from the set of connected components of the real locusX(R) to the set of conjugacy
classes of sections ofπ1(Xι) → Gal(C/R) (or, equivalently, involutions inπ1(Xι)).
Moreover, the centralizer of an involution ιY ∈ π1(Xι) is the image of π1(Y ι) in
π1(Xι).
Proof. Indeed, let ιT ∈ π1(Xι) be an involution. Then ιT may be thought of as an
anti-holomorphic involution of T
def
= ˜X. By Lemma 3.5, the ﬁxed point locus FιT
of ιT is nonempty and connected. Thus, FιT maps into some connected component
Y ⊆ X(R). (In fact, the morphism FιT → Y is a covering map.) By functoriality
(consider the map of triples (T,ιT ,FιT ) → (X,ι,Y )!), it follows thatιY = ιT .T h u s ,
every involution in π1(Xι) arises as some ιY . Next, let us show uniqueness. If ιT
arises from two distinct Y1,Y2 ⊆ X(R), then it would follow that the ﬁxed point
locus FιT contains at least two distinct connected components (corresponding to
Y1, Y2), thus contradicting Lemma 3.5. Finally, if α ∈ π1(Xι) commutes with ιY ,
then α preserves FιY , hence induces an automorphism of FιY over Y ι. But since
FιY → Y ι is a covering map, this implies thatα is in the image ofπ1(Y ι)i n π1(Xι).
This completes the proof. ⃝
Remark. Thus, Theorem 3.6 is a sort of analogue of the so-called “Section Con-
jecture” of anabelian geometry for thediscrete fundamental groups of real complex
manifolds — see [Groth], p. 289, (2); [NTM], §1.2, (GC3), for more on the Section
Conjecture.
Remark. Theorem 3.6 generalizes immediately to the case where X is a complex
analytic stack. In this case, “ Y ι” is to be understood to be the real analytic stack
whose stack structure is inherited from that of the real analytic stackXι.W el e a v e
the routine details to the reader.
§3.3. Hyperbolic Curves and their Moduli
By the discussion of Examples 3.2 (in the case ofH), 3.3, in §3.1, together with
Theorem 3.6 of §3.2, we obtain the following:
Corollary 3.7. (“Discrete Real Section Conjecture for Hyperbolic Real
Riemann Surfaces”) Let (X,ι) be a hyperbolic real Riemann surface .T h e n
the correspondenceY ↦→ ιY of §3.2 deﬁnes a bijection
π0(X(R)) ∼= HomGal(C/R)(Gal(C/R),π1(Xι))

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 23
from the set of connected components of the real locusX(R) to the set of conjugacy
classes of sections ofπ1(Xι) → Gal(C/R) (or, equivalently, involutions inπ1(Xι)).
Remark. Some readers may ﬁnd it strange that there is no discussion of“tangential
sections”(at the “points at inﬁnity” of X) in Corollary 3.7. The reason for this is
that in the present “real context,” where we only considerconnected componentsof
the set of real points, every tangential section arising from a real point at inﬁnity
may be obtained as a limit of a sequence of real points that are not at inﬁnity
(and, which, moreover, may be chosen to lie in the same connected components
of the real locus), hence is “automatically included” in the connected component
containing those real points.
Corollary 3.8. (“Discrete Real Section Conjecture for Moduli of Hy-
perbolic Curves”) Let g,r ≥ 0 be integers such that 2g − 2+ r> 0. Write
(M
g,r,ιM) for the moduli stack of complex hyperbolic curves of type(g,r ), equipped
with its natural anti-holomorphic involution (arising from the structure ofMg,r as
an algebraic stack deﬁned over R). If (X,ι) arises from a real hyperbolic curve of
type (g,r ), then the exact sequence
1 → π1(X) → π1(Xι) → Gal(C/R) → 1
deﬁnes a homomorphism α(X,ι) : Gal(C/R) → π1(MιM
g,r )=M o dg,r ⊆ Out(π1(X))
(where “Out(−)” denotes the group of outer automorphisms of the group in paren-
theses). This correspondence (X,ι) ↦→ α(X,ι) deﬁnes a bijection
π0(Mg,r(R)) ∼= HomGal(C/R)(Gal(C/R),π1(MιM
g,r ))
from the set of connected components of Mg,r(R) to the set of conjugacy classes
of sections of π1(MιM
g,r ) → Gal(C/R) (or, equivalently, involutions in π1(MιM
g,r )).
Moreover, the centralizer of an involutionιY ∈ π1(MιM
g,r ) is the image of π1(Y ι) in
π1(MιM
g,r ).
Remark. Note that the injectivity portionof the bijection of Corollary 3.8, together
with the determination of the centralizer of an involution (the ﬁnal sentence in the
statement of Corollary 3.8), may be regarded as the discrete real analogue of the
so-called “Strong Isomorphism Version of the Grothendieck Conjecture.” (For the
convenience of the reader, we recall that the “Strong Isomorphism Version of the
Grothendieck Conjecture” is the statement of Theorem A in the Introduction, ex-
cept with K-morphism (respectively, homomorphism) replaced by K-isomorphism
(respectively, isomorphism).)
Remark. The author was informed by M. Seppala that results similar to Corollary
3.8 have been obtained in [AG].
§3.4. Abelian V arieties and their Moduli

24 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
We begin with a lemma:
Lemma 3.9. Let (X,ι) be a real complex manifold such that X is an abelian
variety over C. Then there exists a translation-invariant Riemannian metric onX
which is preserved by ι.
Proof. By the Remark following Deﬁnition 3.1, ( X,ι) arises from a projective
algebraic variety XR over R.W r i t eXc for the complex conjugate of the complex
manifold X (i.e., Xc and X have the same underlying real analytic manifold, but
holomorphic functions on Xc are anti-holomorphic functions on X). Since X is an
abelian variety over C, it follows that Xc is also an abelian variety over C.T h u s ,
the holomorphic isomorphism ι: X ∼= Xc is the composite of an isomorphism of
abelian varieties (i.e., one which preserves the group structures) with a translation.
In particular, it follows that ιpreserves the invariant diﬀerentials V
def
=Γ (X, ΩX )
on X.T h u s ,ιinduces a semi-linear (with respect to complex conjugation) auto-
morphism of V , i.e., ιinduces a real structure VR ⊆ VR ×R C = V on V .T h e na n y
inner product on the real vector space VR induces an ι-invariant inner product on
the underlying real vector space ofV which, in turn, induces a translation-invariant
Riemannian metric on X which is preserved by ι, as desired. ⃝
Remark. Note that any Riemannian metric on ˜X arising from a Riemannian metric
as in the conclusion of Lemma 3.9 induces a geometry on ˜X which is isomorphic
to Euclidean space, hence enjoys the property that any two points are joined by a
unique geodesic.
Now if we apply Theorem 3.6 using Lemma 3.9, Example 3.2, we obtain the
following:
Corollary 3.10. (“Discrete Real Section Conjecture for Real Abelian
V arieties”)Let (X,ι) be a real abelian variety . Then the correspondence Y ↦→
ιY of §3.2 deﬁnes a bijection
π0(X(R)) ∼= HomGal(C/R)(Gal(C/R),π1(Xι))
from the set of connected components of the real locusX(R) to the set of conjugacy
classes of sections ofπ1(Xι) → Gal(C/R) (or, equivalently, involutions inπ1(Xι)).
Corollary 3.11. (“Discrete Real Section Conjecture for Moduli of
Abelian V arieties”) Let g ≥ 1 be a positive integer. Write (Ag,ιA) for the
moduli stack of principally polarized abelian varieties of dimensiong, equipped with
its natural anti-holomorphic involution (arising from the structure of Ag as an
algebraic stack deﬁned over R). If (X,ι) is a real abelian variety of dimension g,
then the exact sequence
1 → π1(X) → π1(Xι) → Gal(C/R) → 1

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 25
deﬁnes a homomorphism α(X,ι) : Gal( C/R) → π1(AιA
g ) ∼= GSp(π1(X)) (where
“GSp” denotes the automorphisms that preserve, up to a constant multiple, the
symplectic form deﬁned by the polarization). This correspondence (X,ι) ↦→ α(X,ι)
deﬁnes a bijection
π0(Ag(R)) ∼= HomGal(C/R)(Gal(C/R),π1(AιA
g ))
from the set of connected components of Ag(R) to the set of conjugacy classes
of sections of π1(AιA
g ) → Gal(C/R) (or, equivalently, involutions in π1(AιA
g )).
Moreover, the centralizer of an involution ιY ∈ π1(AιA
g ) is the image of π1(Y ι) in
π1(AιA
g ).
Proof. Note that the bijectivity of the natural morphism
π1(AιA
g ) → GSp(π1(X))
follows from the fact that it is compatible with the projections on both sides to
Gal(C/R) (where the projectionGSp(π1(X)) → Z× = Gal(C/R) is given by looking
at the constant multiple to which the symplectic form arising from the polarization
is mapped), together with the well-known bijectivity of this morphism on the “+”
portions of both sides. ⃝
§3.5. Proﬁnite Real Anabelian Geometry
So far we have considered the real analogue of Grothendieck’s anabelian ge-
ometry given by using the discrete fundamental groups of varieties. Another “real
analogue” of anabelian geometry is that given by using the proﬁnite fundamental
groups. Just as in the discrete, the fundamental result was an existence theorem for
real points in the presence of involutions (i.e., Lemma 3.5),in the proﬁnite case, the
fundamental existence is given by the following theorem of Cox(cf. [Frdl], Corollary
11.3):
Lemma 3.12. Let X be a connected real algebraic variety. Then X(R) ̸= ∅ if
and only if H
i
et(X, Z/2Z) ̸=0 (where “Hi
et” denotes ´etale cohomology) for inﬁnitely
many i.
Remark. In particular, if the complex manifold X(C)i sa“ K(π,1)” space (i.e.,
its universal cover is contractible), and, moreover, its fundamental groupπ1(X(C))
is good (i.e., the cohomology of π1(X(C)) with coeﬃcients in any ﬁnite π1(X(C))-
module is isomorphic (via the natural morphism) to the cohomology of the proﬁnite
completion of π
1(X(C)) with coeﬃcients in that module), then we obtain that:
(*) X(R) ̸= ∅ if and only if Hi
et(πalg
1 (X), Z/2Z) ̸= 0 for inﬁnitely many
integers i.

26 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(where πalg
1 (X) denotes the algebraic fundamental group of the scheme X). Also,
let us observe that if the projection πalg
1 (X) → Gal(C/R) possesses a splitting,
then the fact that Hi
et(Gal(C/R),Z/2Z) ̸= 0 for inﬁnitely many i implies that
Hi
et(πalg
1 (X), Z/2Z) ̸= 0 for inﬁnitely many i.
Since hyperbolic curves and abelian varieties satisfy the conditions of the above
Remark, we thus obtain the following:
Corollary 3.13. (“Proﬁnite Real Section Conjecture for Real Hyper-
bolic Curves”) Let X be a hyperbolic curve over R. Then the proﬁnite version
of the correspondenceY ↦→ ιY of §3.2 deﬁnes a bijection
π0(X(R)) ∼= HomGal(C/R)(Gal(C/R),πalg
1 (X))
from the set of connected components of the real locus X(R) to the set of conju-
gacy classes of sections of πalg
1 (X) → Gal(C/R) (or, equivalently, involutions in
πalg
1 (X)).
Proof. Surjectivity follows from the above Remark, using the technique of [Tama1]:
Namely, given a section α : Gal(C/R) → πalg
1 (X)o f πalg
1 (X) → Gal(C/R), the
family of open subgroups ofπalg
1 (X) containing Im(α) deﬁnes a system of coverings
{Xi → X} (as i varies over the elements of some index set I) such that (by the
above Remark) eachXi(R) ̸= 0. Since each Xi(R) has only ﬁnitely many connected
components, it thus follows that there exists a compatible system (indexed by I)
of connected components of Xi(R). But this amounts to the assertion thatα arises
from some connected component of X(R), as desired (cf. [Tama1], Corollary 2.10).
Injectivity follows from the fact that involutions arising from distinct connected
components deﬁne distinct elements ofH1(πalg
1 (X), Z/2Z) — cf. [Schd], §20, Propo-
sitions 20.1.8, 20.1.12. ⃝
Remark. To the author’s knowledge, the ﬁrst announcement in the literature of
a result such as Corollary 3.13 (in the proper case) appears in a manuscript of
Huisman ([Huis]). (In fact, [Huis] also treats the one-dimensional case of Corollary
3.14 below.) Unfortunately, however, the author was not able to follow the portion
of Huisman’s proof ([Huis], Lemma 5.7) that corresponds to the application of Cox’s
theorem (as in the Remark following Lemma 3.12).
Corollary 3.14. (“Proﬁnite Real Section Conjecture for Real Abelian
V arieties”) Let X be an abelian variety over R. Then the proﬁnite version of
the correspondenceY ↦→ ι
Y of §3.2 deﬁnes a bijection
π0(X(R)) ∼= HomGal(C/R)(Gal(C/R),πalg
1 (X))

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 27
from the set of connected components of the real locus X(R) to the set of conju-
gacy classes of sections of πalg
1 (X) → Gal(C/R) (or, equivalently, involutions in
πalg
1 (X)).
Proof. Surjectivity follows as in the proof of Corollary 3.13. Injectivity follows, for
instance, from the discrete result (Corollary 3.10), together with the injectivity of
the natural morphism
H
1(Gal(C/R),π1(X(C))) → H1(Gal(C/R),πalg
1 (X ⊗R C))
— itself a consequence of the fact that πalg
1 (X ⊗R C)) = π1(X(C)) ⊗Z ˆZ,w h e r eˆZ
is the proﬁnite completion of Z (hence a faithfully ﬂat Z-module). ⃝
As for the case of moduli, the above argument breaks down in most cases since
it is either false that or unknown whether or not the fundamental group of the
corresponding moduli stacks is good. More precisely, π1(Ag)= Sp(2g, Z)i sk n o w n
not to be good if g ≥ 2 (cf. Lemma 3.16 below). (If g = 1, then the “proﬁnite real
section conjecture” forAg is essentially contained in Corollary 3.13 above.) On the
other hand, to the author’s knowledge, it is not known whether or not π1(Mg,r)
is good if g> 2. If g ≤ 2, then, up to passing to ﬁnite ´etale coverings, Mg,r may
be written as a successive extension of smooth families of hyperbolic curves, hence
has a good fundamental group. Thus, we obtain the following:
Corollary 3.15. (“Proﬁnite Real Section Conjecture for Moduli of
Hyperbolic Curves of Genus ≤ 2”) Let g,r ≥ 0 be integers such that2g−2+r>
0, g ≤ 2. Write (M
g,r)R for the moduli stack of complex hyperbolic curves of type
(g,r ) over R.I f X is a real hyperbolic curve of type(g,r ),t h e nX deﬁnes a section
α(X,ι) : Gal(C/R) → πalg
1 ((Mg,r)R). This correspondence (X,ι) ↦→ α(X,ι) deﬁnes a
bijection
π0((Mg,r)R(R)) ∼= HomGal(C/R)(Gal(C/R),πalg
1 ((Mg,r)R))
from the set of connected components of(Mg,r)R(R) to the set of conjugacy classes
of sections of πalg
1 ((Mg,r)R) → Gal(C/R) (or, equivalently, conjugacy classes of
involutions in πalg
1 ((Mg,r)R)). Moreover, the centralizer of an involution ιY ∈
πalg
1 ((Mg,r)R) is the image of the proﬁnite completion of π1(Y ι) in πalg
1 ((Mg,r )R).
Proof. Since (as just remarked) the fundamental groups involved aregood, surjec-
tivity follows as in Corollaries 3.13, 3.14.
As for injectivity, we reason as follows. Given two real hyperbolic curves X,
Y of the same type ( g,r ) which induce the same section α (up to conjugacy) of
πalg
1 ((Mg,r)R) → Gal(C/R), we must show that they belong to the same connected
component of (Mg,r)R(R). First, let us observe that since [ C : R] = 2, it follows

28 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
that the marked points of X and Y over C consist of: (i.) points deﬁned over R;
(ii) complex conjugate pairs. Moreover, the combinatorial data of which points are
deﬁned over R and which points are conjugate pairs is clearly determined by the
section α. Thus, there exists an “ordering of connected components of the divisor
of marked points over R”o f X, Y , which is compatible with α.W r i t e
N→ (Mg,r)R
for the ﬁnite ´etale covering deﬁned by the moduli stack (over R) of hyperbolic
curves equipped with such an ordering. Note, in particular, that the injectivity
assertion under consideration for (M
g,r)R follows formally from the corresponding
injectivity assertion forN.M o r e o v e r ,N may be written as a“successive extension”
N = Nr →N r−1 → ... →N 1 →N 0
of smooth families (i.e., the Nj+1 →N j)o fe i t h e rhyperbolic curves (where we
include curves which are stacks — cf. the remark in parentheses following the list
below) or surfaces (of a special type, to be described below) over the stack N0,
where N0 may be described as follows:
(1) If g =0 ,t h e nN0 is the moduli stack of 4-pointed curves of genus 0,
equipped with an “ordering type” T ,w h e r eT is one of the following: a
total ordering of the four points; a total ordering of two points, plus a pair
of conjugate points; a total ordering of two pairs of conjugate points. In
each of these three cases, one sees thatN
0 is a hyperbolic curve over R,s o
we conclude the corresponding injectivity assertion for N0 from Corollary
3.13.
(2) If g =1 ,t h e nN0 is either the moduli stack of 1-pointed curves of genus
1 (which is a hyperbolic curve, so we may conclude the corresponding
injectivity assertion for N0 from Corollary 3.13), or N0 is the moduli
stack of 2-pointed curves of genus 1, where the two points are unordered.
In the latter case, by considering the “group of automorphisms of the
underlying genus 1 curve which preserve the invariant diﬀerentials,” we
get a morphism N
0 → (M1,1)R, which is a smooth family whose ﬁber over
the elliptic curve E is the stack given by forming the quotient of E\{0E }
(where 0E is the origin of E) by the action of ±1. (Indeed, this ﬁber
parametrizes the “diﬀerence” of the two unordered points.) In particular,
(M1,1)R, as well as these ﬁbers over (M1,1)R are hyperbolic curves, so the
corresponding injectivity assertion for N0 follows from Corollary 3.13.
(3) If g =2 ,t h e nN0 is the moduli stack of 0-pointed curves of genus 2.
Moreover, by using the well-known morphism (M2,0)R → (M0,6)R (given
by considering the ramiﬁcation points of the canonical double covering
of the projective line associated to a curve of genus 2), this case may be
reduced to the case g = 0, which has already been dealt with.

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 29
(We remark here that even though some of the hyperbolic curves appearing above
are in fact stacks, by passing to appropriate ﬁnite ´ etale coverings which are still
deﬁned over R and for which the real points in question lift to real points of the
covering, injectivity for such “stack-curves” follows from injectivity for usual curves
as proven in Corollary 3.13.) Finally, the surfaces that may appear as ﬁbers in the
families N
j+1 →N j appearing above are of the following type: If C is a hyperbolic
curve over R,w r i t eΔC ⊆ C ×R C for the diagonal. Then the surfaces in question
are of the form {(C ×R C)\Δ C }/S2 (where S2 is the symmetric group on two
letters permuting the two factors of C, and we note that this quotient is the same
whether taken in the sense of schemes or of stacks). Now by passing (as in the
one-dimensional case) to appropriate ﬁnite ´etale coverings of these surfaces which
are still deﬁned over R and for which the real points in question lift to real points of
the covering, the corresponding injectivity assertion for such surfaces follows from
injectivity for surfaces that may be written as a smooth family of hyperbolic curves
parametrized by a hyperbolic curve, hence is a consequence of Corollary 3.13. Thus,
by “d´evissage”we conclude the desired injectivity for (M
g,r)R.
Before proceeding, we observe that the above argument shows that the bijec-
tivity assertion of Corollary 3.15 also holds for any ﬁnite ´ etale covering of Mg,r
which is deﬁned over R.
The ﬁnal statement on centralizers may be proven as follows: Given an in-
volution ιY ,w r i t eMY → (Mg,r)R for the pro-covering deﬁned by the subgroup
generated by ιY in πalg
1 ((Mg,r)R). Then the statement on centralizers follows from
the fact that the conjugates of ιY in πalg
1 ((Mg,r)R) are in bijective correspondence
with the connected components of the inverse images of Y in MY (where we note
that this bijective correspondence follows from the observation of the preceding
paragraph). ⃝
Remark. Note that in many respects the proﬁnite theory is more diﬃcult and less
elegant than the discrete theory, where everything follows easily from the very gen-
eral Lemma 3.5. It is thus the feeling of the author thatthe discrete theory provides
a more natural real analogue of anabelian geometry than the proﬁnite theory.
Lemma 3.16. Let g ≥ 2,a n dl e tH ⊆ Sp(2g, Z) be a subgroup of ﬁnite in-
dex. Then there exists a subgroup H′ ⊆ H which is normal and of ﬁnite index in
Sp(2g, Z) such that the cohomological dimension of the proﬁnite completion of H′
is > dimR(Ag)=2 ·dimC(Ag)= g(g+1). (This estimate holds even if one restricts
to H′-modules of order equal to a power of p, for any ﬁxed prime number p.) In
particular, if g ≥ 2,t h e nSp(2g, Z) is not good .
Proof. First, note that if Sp(2g, Z) is good, then so is any subgroup H of ﬁnite
index. But there existH such that if we writeAH′ →A g for the ﬁnite ´etale covering
deﬁned by a ﬁnite index subgroup H′ ⊆ H,t h e nAH′ is a complex manifold (i.e.,
not just a stack). The cohomology of H′ is then given by the cohomology of AH′.
Moreover, the cohomological dimension ofAH′ is = dimR(AH′)=d i mR(Ag). Thus,

30 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
if the cohomological dimension of the proﬁnite completion of H′ is > dimR(Ag), it
follows that the cohomology of H′ and of its proﬁnite completion (with coeﬃcients
in a ﬁnite module) are not isomorphic in general, i.e., thatH′ is not good. But this
implies that Sp(2g, Z)i sn o tg o o d ,a sd e s i r e d .
Next, let us assume that we are givenH as in the statement of Lemma 3.16, and
prove the existence of anH′ as stated. First, let us observe that since thecongruence
subgroup problemhas been resolved aﬃrmatively forSp(2g, Z) (cf. [BMS]), it follows
that:
Sp(2g, Z)∧ = Sp(2g, ˆZ)=
∏
p
Sp(2g, Zp)
(where the “ ∧” denotes the proﬁnite completion, and the product is taken over all
prime numbers p). Thus, it follows that the cohomological dimension ofSp(2g, Z)∧
is ≥ the cohomological dimension of Sp(2g, Zp) for any prime p. In particular, in
order to complete the proof of Lemma 3.16, it suﬃces to show that Sp(2g, Zp) ad-
mits a collection of arbitrarily small normal open subgroups whosep-cohomological
dimension is >g (g +1 ) .
But this follows from the theory of [Laz]: Indeed, by [Laz], V,§2.2.8, it follows
that that the p-cohomological dimension of any “p-valuable group” is equal to the
“rank” r of the group. Here, a p-valuable group (cf. [Laz], III, §2.1.2) is a topogical
group with a ﬁltration satisfying certain properties. In the present context, the
topological group Sp
[n](2g, Zp) (i.e., symplectic matrices which are≡ to the identity
matrix modulo pn), equipped with the ﬁltration deﬁned by the Sp[m](2g, Zp)f o r
m ≥ n, will satisfy these properties. Moreover, the rank r of a p-valuable group
(cf. [Laz], III, §2.1.1, §2.1.3) is the Qp-dimension of the Lie algebra sp(2g, Qp)o f
Sp(2g, Zp). Thus, in this case,
r =d i mQp (sp(2g, Qp)) = dimR(sp(2g, R)) = dimR(Sp(2g, R)) > dimR(Hg)=d i mR(Ag)
(where Hg is the Siegel upper half-plane— cf. Example 3.2). Indeed, the inequality
here follows from the fact that Sp(2g, R)a c t stransitively on Hg,w i t hpositive
dimensional isotropy subgroups. This completes the proof. ⃝
Section 4: Complements to the p-adic Theory
In this §, we present certain complements to thep-adic theory of [Mzk2] which
allow us to prove a certain isomorphism version of Theorem A of [Mzk2] (cf. §0o f
the present manuscript) over a somewhat larger class of ﬁeldsK than was treated in
[Mzk2]. This larger class of ﬁelds — which we refer to as generalized sub-p-adic —
consists of those ﬁelds which may be embedded as subﬁelds of a ﬁnitely generated

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 31
extension of the quotient ﬁeld of W(
Fp) (the ring of Witt vectors with coeﬃcients
in the algebraic closure of Fp, for some prime number p).
§4.1. Good Chern Classes
In this §, we work over a base ﬁeldK, which we assume (for simplicity, although
it is not absolutely necessary for much of what we shall do) to be of characteristic
0. Let XK be a smooth, geometrically connected varietyover K.
If p is a prime number, and n ≥ 1 an integer, then we may consider the
Kummer sequence on XK, i.e., the exact sequence of sheaves on ( XK)et (i.e., the
´etale site of XK)g i v e nb y
0 → (Z/pnZ)(1) → Gm → Gm → 0
(where, the “(1)” is a “Tate twist,” and the morphism fromGm to Gm is given by
raising to thepn-th power.) The connecting morphism induced on ´etale cohomology
by the Kummer sequence then gives us a morphism
δp,n : H1
et(XK, Gm) → H2
et(XK ,(Z/pnZ)(1))
Now suppose thatL is aline bundle onXK. Then applying δp,n to L∈ H1
et(XK, Gm)
gives us a compatible system of classes δp,n(L) ∈ H2
et(XK,(Z/pnZ)(1)), hence (by
letting p, n vary) a class c1(L) ∈ H2
et(XK, ˆZ(1)).
Deﬁnition 4.1. We shall refer to c1(L) ∈ H2
et(XK, ˆZ(1)) as the (proﬁnite,
´etale-theoretic) ﬁrst Chern class of L.I f N ≥ 1 is an integer, then we shall refer to
c1(L)m o dN ∈ H2
et(XK,(Z/NZ)(1)) as the (´etale-theoretic) ﬁrst Chern class of L
modulo N.
Next, let us write
π1(XK)
for the (algebraic) fundamental group of XK (where we omit the base-point since
it will not be explicitly necessary in our discussion). Also, let us assume that we
are given a quotient
π1(XK) ↠ Q
(where Q is proﬁnite, and the surjection is continuous). Then we make the following
crucial deﬁnition :

32 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Deﬁnition 4.2. Let N ≥ 1 be an integer. For i, j ∈ Z, a cohomology class
η ∈ Hi
et(XK,(Z/NZ)(j)) will be calledgood if there exists a (nonempty) ﬁnite ´etale
covering Y → XK such that η|Y ∈ Hi
et(Y, (Z/NZ)(j)) is zero.
Next, suppose that π1(XK) ↠ Q is a surjection such that the composite of the
natural surjection π1(XK) ↠ ΓK with the cyclotomic character ΓK → (Z/NZ)×
factors through Q. Then we shall say thatηis Q-good if this coveringY → XK may
be chosen to arise from a quotient ofπ1(XK) that factors through π1(XK) ↠ Q.I f
L is a line bundle onXK, then we will say thatits Chern class is good (respectively,
Q-good) modulo N if the Chern class of L modulo N in H2
et(XK,(Z/NZ)(1)) is
good (respectively, Q-good).
Recall that a discrete group Γ is said to be good if the cohomology of Γ with
coeﬃcients in any ﬁnite Γ-module is isomorphic (via the natural morphism) to the
cohomology of the proﬁnite completion of Γ with coeﬃcients in that module. Then
the justiﬁcation for the terminology of Deﬁnition 4.2 is the following:
Lemma 4.3. Suppose that K is a subﬁeld of C (the complex number ﬁeld); that
the topological space X
def
= XC(C) is a “ K(π,1)” space (i.e., its universal cover is
contractible); and that the topological fundamental group πtop
1 (X) is good. Then it
follows that all cohomology classes η ∈ Hi
et(XK,(Z/NZ)(j)) are good.
Proof. Write XC
def
= XK ⊗K C, X
K
def
= XK ⊗K
 K. Since ﬁnite ´etale coverings of
XC are always deﬁned over a ﬁnite extension of K, and (by well-known elemen-
tary properties of ´etale cohomology) the natural morphismHi
et(X
K,(Z/NZ)(j)) →
Hi
et(XC,(Z/NZ)(j)) is an isomorphism, one sees immediately that it suﬃces to
prove Lemma 4.3 when K = C, j =0 . B u tt h e n
Hi
et(XC, Z/NZ) ∼= Hi
sing(XC, Z/NZ) ∼= Hi(πtop
1 (X), Z/NZ)
(where the second isomorphism (between singular and group cohomology) follows
from the fact that X is a “ K(π,1)” space). Thus, the fact that η vanishes upon
restriction to a (nonempty) ﬁnite ´etale covering follows from the fact that πtop
1 (X)
is assumed to be good. ⃝
Remark. Thus, under the hypotheses of Lemma 4.3, every cohomology class is
good. In general, however, we would like to work with varieties XK that do not
satisfy the hypotheses of Lemma 4.3, but which nonetheless have the property that
the cohomology classes that we are interested in are good.
Now let L be a line bundle on X
K.L e t u s w r i t eL → XK for the geometric
line bundle associated to L (i.e., the spectrum over XK of the symmetric algebra
over OXK of L−1). Also, let us write

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 33
L× ⊆ L → XK
for the complement of the zero section in L.T h u s ,L× → XK is a Gm-torsor,a n d
we have an exact sequence of (algebraic) fundamental groups
ˆZ(1) = π1((Gm)
K) → π1(L×) → π1(XK ) → 1
(where we omit base-points since they will not be explicitly necessary in our dis-
cussion). In general, however, it is not necessarily the case that the ﬁrst arrow
is injective. (Consider, for instance, the line bundle O(−1) on P1 (over, say, an
algebraically closed ﬁeld K of characteristic zero), in which case L× = A2\{0} has
trivial fundamental group.)
Lemma 4.4. Suppose that the Chern class of L is good modulo all powers of p.
Then the restriction toZp(1) ⊆ ˆZ(1) of the morphism ˆZ(1) → π1(L×) is injective,
so the above exact sequence deﬁnes an extension class ∈ H2(π1(XK), Zp(1)).I f ,
moreover, the Chern class of L is Q-good modulo all powers of p,t h e n( f o ra l l
integers n ≥ 1) the reduction modulo pn of this extension class arises from an
element ∈ H2(Q,(Z/pnZ)(1)).
Proof. Indeed, let
Y → XK
be a ﬁnite ´etale covering such that the Chern class of L modulo pn vanishes upon
restriction to Y . Going back to the deﬁnition of the Chern class using the Kummer
exact sequence, one thus sees that there exists a line bundle P on Y such that
P⊗pn
∼= L|Y .L e tu s w r i t eP× → Y for the complement of the zero section in the
geometric line bundle corresponding to P.T h u s ,P× → Y is a Gm-torsor with the
property that, if we execute the change of structure group Gm → Gm given by
raising to the pn-th power, we obtain the Gm-torsor L×|Y
def
= L× ×XK Y → Y .I n
particular, we obtain a ﬁnite ´etale covering
P× → L×|Y
whose restriction to the geometric ﬁbers of L×|Y → Y is (isomorphic to) the
covering of Gm given by raising to the pn-th power. Sorting through the def-
initions of the various fundamental groups involved, one thus sees that the ex-
istence of such coverings implies that Z
p(1) → π1(L×) is injective, and, more-
over, that if the covering Y → XK arises from a quotient of Q, then the ex-
tension class ∈ H2(π1(XK),(Z/pnZ)(1)) deﬁned by π1(L×) arises from a class
∈ H2(Q,(Z/pnZ)(1)), as desired. ⃝

34 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Remark. In the Q-good portion of Lemma 4.4, it was necessary to use ﬁnite coeﬃ-
cients Z/pnZ (i.e., rather thanZp) since it is not clear that the various group exten-
sions ofQ by (Z/pnZ)(1) form acompatiblesystem asn varies. (When Q = π1(XK),
one need not worry about this since one already has a natural group extension,
namely, that arising from π
1(L×).)
Lemma 4.5. Suppose that the Chern class of L is good modulo all powers of p.
Write
cgp
1 (L) ∈ H2(π1(XK), Zp(1))
for the extension class of Lemma 4.4. Then the image of cgp
1 (L) under the natural
map
H2(π1(XK), Zp(1)) → H2
et(XK, Zp(1))
is equal to the ( p-adic portion of the) ﬁrst Chern class c1(L) of Deﬁnition 4.1.
If, moreover, the Chern class of L is Q-good modulo all powers of p,t h e n( f o r
all integers n ≥ 1)t h e r ee x i s t sac l a s s∈ H2(Q,(Z/pnZ)(1)) whose image in
H2
et(XK,(Z/pnZ)(1)) is equal to c1(L)m o dpn.
Proof. If Γ is a proﬁnite group, then let us denote by B(Γ) the “classifying site of
Γ,”i.e., the site deﬁned by considering the category of ﬁnite sets with continuous
Γ-action (and coverings given by surjections of such sets). Thus, if M is a ﬁnite
abelian group with continuous Γ-action, then M deﬁnes a sheaf of abelian groups
on this site whose cohomology may be identiﬁed with the usual group cohomology
of Γ with coeﬃcients in M.
Next, let us note that relative to this notation, there is atautological morphism
(XK)et → B(π1(XK))
determined by the well-known equivalence between ﬁnite ´ etale coverings of XK
and ﬁnite sets with continuous π1(XK )-action. Put another way, this morphism
is the ´etale analogue of the well-known tautological morphism (determined up to
homotopy equivalence) in topology from a topological space to the classifying space
of its fundamental group. By functoriality, we thus obtain a commutative diagram:
(L×)et −→ B(π1(L×))
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
(X
K)et −→ B(π1(XK))
(where the horizontal morphisms are the tautological morphisms just discussed,
and the vertical morphisms are those induced by functoriality from L× → XK).
Next, let us observe that both vertical morphisms of the above commutative
diagram give rise to Leray-Serre spectral sequenceson cohomology with coeﬃcients
in Zp(1). (Here, we note that the fact that the vertical morphism on the right gives

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 35
rise to such a spectral sequence follows from the injectivity assertion of Lemma
4.4.) In particular, if we consider the diﬀerential on the “E2-term” of these spectral
sequences we obtain a commutative diagram:
Zp = H0(π1(XK),H 1(ˆZ(1),Zp(1))) −→ Zp = H0
et(XK,H 1
et((Gm)
K, Zp(1)))
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
H
2(π1(XK), Zp(1)) −→ H2
et(XK, Zp(1))
(where the vertical morphisms are the diﬀerentials of the spectral sequence, and the
horizontal morphisms are induced by the morphisms of sites just discussed). On
the other hand, sorting through the deﬁnitions, one sees that it is a tautology that
the image of 1 ∈ Zp under the vertical morphism on the right (respectively, left) is
the Chern class c1(L) (respectively, cgp
1 (L)). Thus, the assertion that the image of
cgp
1 (L)i n H2
et(XK , Zp(1)) is equal to c1(L) follows from the commutativity of the
above diagram. The corresponding assertion in theQ-good case follows by replacing
π1(XK), Zp in the above argument by Q, Z/pnZ, respectively, and applying the
Q-good portion of Lemma 4.4. ⃝
Lemma 4.6. Suppose that XK is equipped with a smooth, proper morphism
XK → ZK
(where ZK is a smooth, geometrically connected variety over K) which admits a
section σ : ZK → XK. Also, let us assume that K may be embedded as a subﬁeld
of C, and that if
 z is any geometric point ofZK such that k(
z) may be embedded as
as u b ﬁ e l do fC, then the geometric ﬁber X
z
def
= XK ×ZK
 z satisﬁes the hypotheses
of Lemma 4.3 (i.e., its complex valued points form a “ K(π,1)” space with good
topological fundamental group). Then the Chern class of any line bundle L on XK
for which the pull-back σ∗(L) is trivial (as a line bundle on ZK)i s good modulo
all integers N ≥ 1.
Proof. First, let us observe that we may always replace ZK (respectively, XK)
by a ﬁnite ´etale covering of ZK (respectively, XK, possibly at the expense of also
replacing ZK by some new ﬁnite ´etale covering ofZK) without aﬀecting the validity
of either the hypotheses or the conclusion of the lemma. Next, ﬁx a geometric point
z of Z as in the statement of Lemma 4.6, and write X
z for the resulting geometric
ﬁber. Then the existence of the sectionσ implies that we obtain an exact sequence
of fundamental groups:
1 → π1(X
z) → π1(XK) → π1(ZK) → 1
Indeed, in general (i.e., in the absence of hypothesis that σ exist) the morphism
π1(X
z) → π1(XK) need not be injective. That is to say, its kernel is naturally iso-
morphic to the cokernel of the morphism (induced by XK → ZK via functoriality)

36 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
between certain ´etale-theoretic second homotopy groups of XK and ZK (cf. [Frdl],
p. 107, Theorem 11.5). On the other hand, since XK → ZK admits a section,i t
thus follows (by functoriality) that this morphism between second homotopy groups
also admits a section, hence that it is surjective (i.e., its cokernel is trivial). This
implies the injectivity of the morphism π
1(X
z) → π1(XK). Note that, stated in
words, the injectivity of this morphism implies that (after possible base-change to
a ﬁnite ´etale covering of ZK) any ﬁnite ´etale covering of X
z may be realized as the
restriction to the ﬁber X
z of a ﬁnite ´etale covering of XK.
Next, let us consider the Leray-Serre spectral sequenceassociated to the mor-
phism XK → ZK for ´etale cohomology with coeﬃcients in (Z/pnZ)(1) (for some p,
n as in Deﬁnition 4.1). If we consider the “ E2-term”of this spectral sequence, we
see that the cohomology groupH2
et(XK,(Z/pnZ)(1)) gets a natural ﬁltration whose
“highest subquotient” (i.e., the subquotient which is, in fact, a quotient) is a sub-
module of H
0
et(ZK,H 2
et(X
z,(Z/pnZ)(1))). On the other hand, by the assumptions
placed on X
z, it follows that all the classes of H2
et(X
z,(Z/pnZ)(1)) vanish upon
restriction to some ﬁnite ´etale covering of X
z. Moreover, by the discussion of the
preceding paragraph, it follows that this covering may be realized as the restriction
to X
z of a ﬁnite ´etale covering of XK. Thus, in conclusion, by replacing XK and
ZK by appropriate ﬁnite ´etale coverings, we may assume that the image of the class
c1(L)m o dpn in the highest subquotient of H2
et(XK,(Z/pnZ)(1)) vanishes.
The next highest subquotient of the natural ﬁltration onH2
et(XK,(Z/pnZ)(1))
induced by the Leray-Serre spectral sequence may be regarded naturally as a sub-
module of H1
et(ZK,H 1
et(X
z,(Z/pnZ)(1))). Thus, by an argument similar to that of
the preceding paragraph, we conclude that we may assume that the image of the
class c
1(L)m o d pn in the next highest subquotient of H2
et(XK,(Z/pnZ)(1)) also
vanishes.
The next subquotient (i.e., the subquotient which is, in fact, a submodule) of
the natural ﬁltration on H2
et(XK,(Z/pnZ)(1)) induced by the Leray-Serre spec-
tral sequence is given by the submodule of H2
et(XK,(Z/pnZ)(1)) which is the
image of H2
et(ZK,(Z/pnZ)(1)) in H2
et(XK,(Z/pnZ)(1)) (via pull-back relative to
XK → ZK). Note that the existence of the section σ implies that this pull-back
morphism H2
et(ZK,(Z/pnZ)(1)) → H2
et(XK,(Z/pnZ)(1)) is injective.T h u s , w e
conclude that the class c1(L)m o dpn arises as the pull-back to XK of a class in
H2
et(ZK,(Z/pnZ)(1)). On the other hand, by pulling back via σ (and applying the
functoriality of the formation of the Chern class of a line bundle), we thus see that
this class in H2
et(ZK,(Z/pnZ)(1)) is simply c1(σ∗(L)) mod pn, which is = 0 (since
σ∗(L) is assumed to be trivial). This completes the proof of Lemma 4.6. ⃝
§4.2. The Group-Theoreticity of a Certain Chern Class
In this §,w el e tK be a ﬁeld of characteristic 0 (until further notice). Also, we
ﬁx a prime number p and an integer g ≥ 2.
Let us denote by A the moduli stack of principally polarized abelian varieties
of dimension g.W r i t e

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 37
G→A
for the tautological abelian scheme over A,a n dϵ : A→G for its identity section.
Also, let us denote byLG the tautological line bundleon G that deﬁnes the principal
polarization. Thus, LG is relatively ample overA, and we assume that it isrigidiﬁed
by some isomorphism ϵ∗(LG) ∼= OA. Also, we ﬁx a geometric point
 a ∈A (
K), and
denote the fundamental group π1(G
a) of the geometric ﬁber G
a by π1(G/A). Thus,
we obtain an exact sequence of fundamental groups
1 → π1(G/A) → π1(G) → π1(A) → 1
equipped with a section π1(ϵ): π1(A) → π1(G) which allows us to identify π1(G)
with the semi-direct product π1(G/A) ⋊ π1(A). Next, observe that since π1(G/A)
is a free ˆZ-module of rank 2g,w em a yw r i t e
π1(G/A)=Π (p)
G/A × Π(̸=p)
G/A
for the natural decomposition of π1(G/A) as a product of a Zp-free module — i.e.,
Π(p)
G/A — and a module Π(̸=p)
G/A which is free over the product of allZp′ ,w h e r ep′ ranges
over the prime numbers not equal top. Moreover, the above exact sequence shows
that π1(A) acts naturally on π1(G/A) in a way that respects this decomposition.
In particular, we may push forward the above exact sequence via the quotient
π1(G/A) ↠ Π(p)
G/A to obtain exact sequences (where Π (p/A)
G is deﬁned by the ﬁrst
exact sequence)
1 → Π(̸=p)
G/A → π1(G) → Π(p/A)
G → 1
1 → Π(p)
G/A → Π(p/A)
G → π1(A) → 1
— of which the second exact sequence admits a section that allows us to identify
Π(p/A)
G with the semi-direct product Π(p)
G/A ⋊ π1(A).
Now let us considerπ1(A) in greater detail. First, let us recall that the action of
π1(A)o nΠ (p)
G/A preserves the symplectic form deﬁned by the tautological principal
polarization on the family of abelian varieties G→A up to multiplication by a
scalar. Let us denote by
GSp(Π(p)
G/A)
the group of Zp-linear automorphisms of Π(p)
G/A which preserve this symplectic form
up to multiplication by a scalar. Thus, we obtain a natural commutative diagram
(in which the rows are exact):

38 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
1 −→ Sp(π1(G/A)) −→ π1(A) −→ ΓK −→ 1
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
1 −→ Sp(Π
(p)
G/A) −→ GSp(Π(p)
G/A) −→ Zp
× −→ 1
Here, “Sp” denotes the group of ˆZ-linear automorphisms of π1(G/A) that preserve
the symplectic form in questionprecisely; the homomorphismGSp(Π(p)
G/A) → Zp
× is
the map that assigns to an element of the domain thescalar by which this element
acts on the symplectic form in question. (Also, we note that here, we apply the
well-known facts that: (i.) when K = C, the topological fundamental group ofA is
equal to Sp(2g, Z); (ii.) for g ≥ 2, the congruence subgroup problem for Sp(2g, Z)
has been resolved aﬃrmatively (cf. the proof of Lemma 3.16; [BMS]).) Finally,
we observe that the vertical morphism (on the right) Γ
K → Zp
× is simply the
cyclotomic character of K.
In particular, by applying the identiﬁcation of Π (p/A)
G with the semi-direct
product Π(p)
G/A ⋊ π1(A), we obtain a continuous homomorphism
Π(p/A)
G → Π(p)
G
def
=Π (p)
G/A ⋊ GSp(Π(p)
G/A)
which is surjective whenever the cyclotomic character ΓK → Zp
× is surjective.A s
is well-known (cf., e.g., [Ser3], Chapter XIV,§7), this is the case, for instance, when
K = Q, Qp.
In the present discussion, we would like to concentrate our attention on the
prime p,i nt h ecase K = Q.T h u s ,w eh a v esurjections:
π1(G) ↠ Π(p/A)
G ↠ Π(p)
G
Let us denote (by abuse of notation relative to Deﬁnition 4.1) thep-adic component
of the ﬁrst Chern class of LG by:
c1(LG) ∈ H2
et(G, Zp(1))
Then we have the following:
Lemma 4.7. Suppose that K = Q. Then relative to the tautological morphisms
Get → B(π1(G)) → B(Π(p)
G )
(cf. the proof of Lemma 4.5), the classc1(LG)m o dpn ∈ H2
et(G,(Z/pnZ)(1)) arises
from a class ∈ H2(Π(p)
G ,(Z/pnZ)(1)), for all integers n ≥ 1.

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 39
Proof. Indeed, Lemma 4.7 follows from Lemmas 4.4, 4.5, together with the proof
of Lemma 4.6 (where, in Lemma 4.6, we take “ G→A ”a so u rs m o o t h ,p r o p e r
morphism “ XK → ZK”). In fact, if we apply Lemmas 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, literally as
stated, we already obtain thatc1(LG) arises from a class ∈ H2(π1(G), Zp(1)). Since
the kernel of the surjection π1(G) ↠ Π(p/A)
G is equal to Π(̸=p)
G/A ,w h i c hi saproﬁnite
group of order prime to p, it thus follows immediately that this class arises from
ac l a s s∈ H2(Π(p/A)
G , Zp(1)). To see that, in fact, c1(LG)m o d pn arises from a
class ∈ H2(Π(p)
G ,(Z/pnZ)(1)), it suﬃces to observe that, in the proof of Lemma
4.6, the only coverings of G that were necessary to annihilate c1(LG ) modulo pn
were coverings of G that restricted to arbitrary p-power coverings of the abelian
variety G
a. But it is clear from the deﬁnition of Π(p)
G (cf. the discussion above) that
such coverings may be constructed from quotients of Π (p/A)
G that factor through
the quotient Π(p/A)
G ↠ Π(p)
G . Thus, we conclude by taking “ Q” to be the quotient
π1(G) ↠ Π(p)
G in Lemmas 4.4, 4.5. This completes the proof of Lemma 4.7. ⃝
Next, let us denote by
Δ
ac o p yo ft h emaximal pro-p quotient of the proﬁnite completion of the fundamental
group of a (Riemann) surface of genusg. Since, as is well-known (cf., e.g., [Tama1],
Proposition 1.11), Δ is center-free,w eh a v ea nexact sequence of proﬁnite groups:
1 → Δ → AΔ
def
= Aut(Δ) → OΔ
def
= Out(Δ) → 1
If we form the quotient A′
Δ of AΔ by the kernel of the quotient Δ ↠ Δab (to the
maximal abelian quotient of Δ), then we obtain a natural commutative diagram(in
which the rows are exact):
1 −→ Δ −→ AΔ −→ OΔ −→ 1
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
1 −→ Δ
ab −→ A′
Δ −→ OΔ −→ 1
In particular, we obtain a natural action of OΔ on Δab which preserves the natural
symplectic form on Δab — i.e., the symplectic form determined by the cup product
on group cohomology H1(Δ , Zp) × H1(Δ , Zp) → H2(Δ , Zp) ∼= Zp (where we think
of H1(Δ , Zp)a st h eZp-linear dual to Δab)— up to multiplication by a scalar.L e t
us denote by
GSp(Δab)
the group of Zp-linear automorphisms of Δab which preserve this symplectic form
up to multiplication by a scalar. Thus, we obtain a natural homomorphism

40 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
OΔ → GSp(Δab)
together with an OΔ -equivariant action of Δ ab on A′
Δ (via the inclusion Δ ab ↪→
A′
Δ ), which determines an isomorphism of proﬁnite groups
(Δab ⋊O Δ ) ×OΔ A′
Δ ∼= A′
Δ ×OΔ A′
Δ
— i.e., in more “geometric language,” A′
Δ is a “Δab-torsor” overOΔ .I np a r t i c u l a r ,
by applying this isomorphism, we obtain a natural projection:
A′
Δ ×OΔ A′
Δ
→ (Δab ⋊O Δ ) → (Δab ⋊ GSp(Δab))
Moreover, any choice of symplectic isomorphism Δab ∼= Π(p)
G/A determines an iso-
morphism
(Δab ⋊ GSp(Δab)) ∼= Π(p)
G
which, up to composition with aninner automorphism,i s independent of our choice
of symplectic isomorphism.
In a similar vein, let us write M for the moduli stack of smooth, proper curves
of genus g over K,a n d
C→M
for the tautological curve over M. Also, let us write J→ M for the Jacobian of
C→M and (for d ∈ Z) Jd →M for the J -torsor over M that parametrizes line
bundles on C of relative degreed over M. By assigning to a point of the curveC the
line bundle on C deﬁned by that point (regarded as an eﬀective divisor), we obtain
a natural morphism:
C→J 1
Moreover, the action of J on J1 determines an isomorphism
J× M J1 ∼= J1 ×M J1
hence also a projection J1 ×M J1 →J . In particular, by composition, we obtain a
morphism
C× M C→J 1 ×M J1 →J

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 41
(over M), which may be thought of, in terms of S-valued points (where S is a
scheme), as the morphism that maps a pair of points (x,y ) ∈C (S) ×M(S) C(S)t o
the line bundle of degree0 on C determined by the divisorx − y. Finally, if we write
M→A for the Torelli morphism — i.e., the classifying morphism of the abelian
scheme J→ M (equipped with its natural principal “theta polarization”) — we
thus obtain a natural commutative diagram
J− → G
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
M− →A
which is, in fact,cartesian, and, moreover, (by composition) induces acommutative
diagram:
C×
M C− →G
⏐⏐↓
⏐⏐↓
M− → A
Denote by LC×MC the pull-back of LG to C× M C.
Next, we consider fundamental groups. Fix a geometric point
 m ∈M (
K),
and a set Σ of prime numbers such that p ∈ Σ. Write π1(C/M)f o rπ1(C
m), and
π1(C/M) ↠ ΠC/M for the maximal pro-Σ quotient of π1(C/M). Since this quotient
is characteristic, its kernel is also normal when regarded as a subgroup of π1(C);
denote the quotient ofπ1(C) by this kernel by ΠC. Thus, if we write ΠM
def
= π1(M),
then we obtain an exact sequence:
1 → ΠC/M → ΠC → ΠM → 1
Moreover, the morphismC×MC→G considered in the preceding paragraph induces
a morphism on fundamental groups:
ΠC ×ΠM ΠC → Π(p)
G
Finally, it is an immediate formal consequence of our deﬁnitions that the diagram
ΠC ×ΠM
ΠC −→ Π(p)
G
⏐⏐
↓
⏐⏐
↓
A
Δ ×OΔ AΔ −→ (Δab ⋊ GSp(Δab))
—w h e r et h elower horizontal morphism is the morphism constructed above; the
vertical morphism on the leftarises from the naturalaction by conjugationof ΠC on

42 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
ΠC/M (a proﬁnite group whose maximal pro-p quotient is isomorphic to Δ); and the
vertical morphism on the right is the isomorphism (well-deﬁned up to composition
with an inner automorphism) discussed above — commutes up to composition with
an inner automorphism.I np a r t i c u l a r ,by pulling back along the morphisms in this
commutative diagram the group cohomology classes discussed in Lemma 4.7,i tt h u s
follows formally from Lemma 4.7 that:
Corollary 4.8. Suppose that K = Q. Then relative to the tautological morphisms
(C× M C)et → B(ΠC ×ΠM
ΠC) → B(AΔ ×OΔ AΔ )
(cf. Lemma 4.7), the class c1(LC×M C)m o dpn ∈ H2
et(C× M C,(Z/pnZ)(1)) arises
from a class ∈ H2(AΔ ×OΔ AΔ ,(Z/pnZ)(1)), for all integers n ≥ 1.
§4.3. A Generalization of the Main Result of [Mzk2]
In this §, we maintain the notation of §4.2, except that we again allow K to
be an arbitrary ﬁeld of characteristic 0 (until further notice).
Let us assume that we are given two hyperbolic curves X1, X2 of type (g,r )
over K.F o r i =1 ,2, let us write π1((Xi)
K) ↠ Π(Xi)
K
for the maximal pro-Σ
quotient of π1((Xi)
K), and π1(Xi) ↠ ΠXi for the quotient of π1(Xi)b yt h ek e r n e l
of π1((Xi)
K) ↠ Π(Xi)
K
.T h u s ,f o ri =1 ,2, we obtain exact sequences:
1 → Π(Xi)
K
→ ΠXi → ΓK → 1
Next, let us assume that we are given an isomorphism
α :Π X1
∼= ΠX2
which preserves and induces the identity on the quotients Π Xi ↠ ΓK.T h u s ,α
induces isomorphisms:
Πα
K
:Π (X1)
K
∼= Π(X2)
K
αH2
et
: H2
et(X1, Zp(1)) ∼= H2(ΠX1 , Zp(1)) ∼= H2(ΠX2 , Zp(1)) ∼= H2
et(X2, Zp(1))
Lemma 4.9. Let X be a proper hyperbolic curve over K equipped with a non-
trivial automorphism σ : X ∼= X over K. Denote the Jacobian of X by JX.
Then the morphism
δσ : X → JX
that maps an S-valued point x ∈ X(S) (where S is a scheme) to the degree 0 line
bundle determined by the divisor x − σ(x) is nonconstant.

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 43
Proof. Assume (without loss of generality) that X(K)i s nonempty.T h e n w e
may think of JX as the Albanese variety associated to X.W r i t eλ : X → JX for
the morphism exhibiting JX as the Albanese variety of X. Then (by the univer-
sal property of the Albanese variety) δσ necessarily factors through λ, inducing a
morphism δλ
σ : JX → JX which is nonconstant if and only ifδσ is nonconstant. On
the other hand, δλ
σ is easily computed to be (up to composition with a translation)
equal to the morphism 1 − Jσ,w h e r eJσ is the automorphism induced on JX by
σ. Thus, it suﬃces to verify that Jσ is not equal to the identity. But this follows
again (formally) from the universal property of the Albanese variety. ⃝
Corollary 4.10. Suppose that r =0 . Then for i =1 ,2,t h e r ee x i s ta m p l e
line bundles Pi on Xi with the property that c1(P1) ∈ H2
et(X1, Zp(1)) maps to
c1(P2) ∈ H2
et(X2, Zp(1)) under αH2
et
.
Proof. First, let us observe that by replacing theXi by ﬁnite ´etale Galois coverings
that correspond viaα, we may assume (without loss of generality) thatXi admits a
K-automorphism σi such that σ1, σ2 correspond via α. Indeed, once the necessary
line bundles are deﬁned over these coverings, one obtains line bundles on the original
curves with the desired properties by simply “taking the norm” of the line bundles
on the coverings.
Since X
i deﬁnes a classifying morphism κi : Spec(K) →M ,w el e tP′
i be the
pull-back (where we note thatXi = C× M,κi Spec(K)) of the line bundle LC×MC of
Corollary 4.8 to Xi ×K Xi. Moreover, by Lemma 4.9, it follows that the pull-back
Pi of P′
i via the morphism (1 ,σi): Xi → Xi ×K Xi given by the product of the
identity and the automorphism σ is ample on Xi.
Now let us consider the homomorphism on fundamental groups (well-deﬁned
up to composition with an inner automorphism)
ΠXi → ΠC
induced by κi. Note that the composite
ΠXi → AΔ
of this homomorphism with the natural homomorphism Π C → AΔ of §4.2 may be
constructed entirely group-theoretically(from the action by conjugation of ΠXi on
its normal subgroup Π(Xi)
K
). Thus, in particular, it follows that (fori =1 ,2) these
composites are compatible with α.
This compatibility implies that the composite of the homomorphism
ΠXi ×ΓK ΠXi → ΠC ×ΠM ΠC
(induced by κi) with the homomorphism Π C ×ΠM
ΠC → AΔ ×OΔ AΔ of §4.2 is a
homomorphism

44 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
ΠXi ×ΓK ΠXi → AΔ ×OΔ AΔ
which is compatible with α.T h u s , i tfollows formally from Corollary 4.8 that the
Chern classes of the P′
i correspond viaα. Since the pull-back via “(1,σi)” may also
be deﬁned entirely group-theoretically, we thus conclude that the Chern classes of
the P′
i correspond viaα, as desired. This completes the proof of Corollary 4.10. ⃝
We are now ready to state and prove themain result of the present §4:
Deﬁnition 4.11. We shall say that K is generalized sub-p-adic if K may be
embedded as a subﬁeld of a ﬁnitely generated extension of the quotient ﬁeld of
W(
Fp) (the ring of Witt vectors with coeﬃcients in the algebraic closure ofFp).
Remark. Note thatsub-p-adic ﬁelds are always generalized sub-p-adic. On the other
hand, ﬁelds such as the maximal algebraic extension of Q which is unramiﬁed over
p are generalized sub-p-adic, but not sub-p-adic.
Remark. Suppose that K is generalized sub-p-adic,w h e r ep ∈ Σ. Then note that
even if we do not know a priori that the hyperbolic curves X1, X2 are of the same
type (g,r ), the mere existence of an isomorphism
α :Π X1
∼= ΠX2
(which preserves and induces the identity on the quotients Π Xi ↠ ΓK) already
implies that X1 and X2 are of the same type. Indeed, to see this, we reduce im-
mediately to the case where K is ﬁnite over the quotient ﬁeld of W(
Fp)a n dt h e n
consider the dimension of the weight 0 portion of the Hodge-Tate decomposition
of the maximal pro- p abelian quotient of Π
(Xi)
K
. This dimension gives back the
genus g;t h e nr may be recovered from the fact that Π (Xi)
K
is free on 2g + r − 1
generators (respectively, not free) if r> 0 (respectively, r = 0). Thus, there is no
loss of generality in assuming (as we did in the above discussion) that the Xi are
of the same “type” (g,r ).
Theorem 4.12. (Isomorphism V ersion of the Grothendieck Conjec-
ture over Generalized Sub-p-adic Fields) Suppose that K is a generalized
sub-p-adic ﬁeld ,w h e r ep ∈ Σ.L e t X1, X2 be hyperbolic curves over K.L e t
us write Isom(X1,X2) for the set of K-isomorphisms between X1 and X2,a n d
IsomΓK (ΠX1 ,ΠX2 ) for the set of continuous group isomorphisms ΠX1
∼= ΠX2 over
ΓK, considered up to composition with an inner automorphism arising fromΠ(X1)
K
or Π(X2)
K
. Then the natural map
Isom(X1,X2) → IsomΓK (ΠX1 ,ΠX2 )

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 45
is bijective.
Remark. One formal consequence of Theorem 4.12 (cf. [Mzk2], Theorem C) is the
following:
If K is generalized sub-p-adic, and M denotes the moduli stack of hyper-
bolic curves of type (g,r )o v e rK, then the natural morphism
M(K) → SectΓK (ΓK,ΠM)
is injective.
(Here, ΠM is as deﬁned in §4.2 (where we note that the same formal deﬁnition can
be made even in the caser> 0), and “SectΓK (ΓK,ΠM)” is the set of sections of the
projection Π M ↠ ΓK considered up to composition with an inner automorphism
of ΠM arising from ΠM
K
.)
Proof. In a word, once one has Corollary 4.10, the proof of Theorem 4.12 is entirely
similar to the proof of Theorem A in [Mzk2], so we will only sketch details.
First, we reduce immediately to the case where K is a ﬁnite extension of the
quotient ﬁeld of W(
Fp) (cf. Lemmas 4.13, 4.14, below; [Mzk2], §15), and X1, X2
are proper of genus g (cf. [Mzk2], proof of Theorem 14.1).
Now, the main idea of the proof is to replace the portion of the proof of [Mzk2]
given in [Mzk2], §1 – 6, by Corollary 4.10, by using the following argument. First,
(for i =1 ,2 )l e tu sw r i t e
Hi
def
= H2
et(Xi, Qp(1))
and Gi ⊆H i for the geometric part of Hi, i.e., the Qp-subspace generated by ﬁrst
Chern classes of line bundles onXi. Also, let us writeJi for the Jacobian of Xi,a n d
T(Ji) for its associated p-adic Tate module. Note that α induces an isomorphism
αH : H1 ∼= H2. Also, let us observe that since K has cohomological dimension
1 (cf. Lemma 4.13 below), applying the Leray-Serre spectral sequence (for Galois
cohomology with coeﬃcients in Qp(1)) to the surjection Π(p)
Xi ↠ ΓK gives rise to an
exact sequence:
0 → H1(K,T (Ji) ⊗ Qp) →H i → Qp → 0
(where the “ T(Ji)” on the left should, strictly speaking, be the Cartier dual of
T(Ji), but we identify T(Ji) with its Cartier dual via the standard principal po-
larization on the Jacobian Ji;t h e“ Qp” on the right arises from the isomorphism
H0(K,H 2(Π(p)
(Xi)
K
, Qp(1)) ∼= Qp deﬁned by the “degree map”).

46 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Now I claim that αH(G1)= G2. Indeed, by Corollary 4.10, there exists a line
bundle Pi of nonzero degreeon Xi such that αH(c1(P1)) = c1(P2). Thus, to show
that αH(G1)= G2, it suﬃces to show that αH preserves ﬁrst Chern classes of line
bundles of degree 0. Since we are working over Qp, we may always replace K by
a ﬁnite extension of K without aﬀecting the validity of the claim. In particular,
we may assume that the Xi have semi-stable reduction over K.W r i t eJi for
the unique semi-abelian scheme over OK whose generic ﬁber is Ji.N o w i f Li
is a line bundle of degree 0 on Xi, it deﬁnes a point [ Li] ∈ Ji(K), hence, by
Kummer theory (i.e., considering the obstruction to the p-power divisibility of [Li]
— cf. [Mzk2], §6, the discussion following Deﬁnition 6.1), determines an element
κ(Li) ∈ H1(K,T (Ji)⊗Qp). If we regard this Galois cohomology group as a subspace
of Hi via the exact sequence of the preceding paragraph, then this class κ(Li)
coincides with the ﬁrst Chern class c1(Li) of Li (cf. [Mzk2], the Remark preceding
Deﬁnition 6.2). On the other hand, if [L1] ∈ J1(K) arises from a point ∈J 1(OK)
which is equal to the zero section modulo mK,t h e nκ(L1) corresponds, via α,t o
κ(L2) for some degree0 line bundle L2 on X2 deﬁned by a point ∈J 2(OK)( w h i c h
will also be equal to the zero section modulo mK). Indeed, this follows by applying
“Tate’s theorem” (cf. [Tate], Theorem 4) as in the argument of the proof of [Mzk2],
Theorem 7.4, to thep-divisible groups deﬁned by the formal groups associated toJ
1,
J2. Moreover, for any point ∈ J1(K) it follows from the fact that
 Fp = OK/mK
is a union of ﬁnite ﬁelds that some nonzero multiple of this point arises from a
point ∈J 1(OK) which is equal to the zero section modulo mK. Thus, since we are
working withQp-coeﬃcients, we thus conclude thatαH maps theQp-subspace of H1
generated by ﬁrst Chern classes of line bundles of degree 0 onto the corresponding
subspace of H2. This completes the proof of the claim.
Before proceeding, we note here that the argument of the preceding paragraph
is the only place in this proof where we use that the original base ﬁeld is a subﬁeld
of a ﬁnitely generated extension of the quotient ﬁeld of W(
Fp) — i.e., as opposed
to W(k), where we permit k to be an arbitrary perfect ﬁeld of characteristicp.T h e
arguments to be used in the remainder of the proof are valid for
Fp replaced by an
arbitrary such k. Also, we remark here that (not surprisingly) the portion of the
argument of [Mzk2] that corresponds to what was done in the preceding paragraph
is given in [Mzk2], §1 – 6, where it was necessary, especially for the arguments
of [Mzk2], Lemma 4.1, §6, to assume that the residue ﬁeld be ﬁnite (i.e., not an
arbitrary perfect ﬁeld of characteristic p).
Now that we know that α preserves (up to Qp-coeﬃcients) ﬁrst Chern classes
of line bundles over ﬁnite extensions of K, the rest of the argument of [Mzk2] goes
through without much change. Namely, [Mzk2], Proposition 7.4, follows by the
same argument as that given in loc. cit. (except that instead of working over a
K which is ﬁnite over Qp as in loc. cit. , we work over the present “ K,” which is
ﬁnite over the quotient ﬁeld of W(
Fp)). We remark that in the present context, it
is not necessary to distinguish between “F-geometricity” and “FI -geometricity” as
was done in [Mzk2], since we are working withproper curves to begin with (cf. the
Remark at the end of [Mzk2], §7). Then [Mzk2], §8, goes through without change
(except that the ﬁnite ﬁeld “k” is to be replaced by
Fp). The convergence arguments
of [Mzk2], §9, 10, are entirely valid when k is any perfect ﬁeld of characteristic p,

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 47
so no changes are necessary in these two §’s. [Mzk2], §11, is unnecessary in the
present context since we are working withproper curves to begin with. Finally, the
arguments of [Mzk2], §12 – 14, go through without essential change (except that
they are much easier in the present context since we are working withproper curves
to begin with). This completes the proof of the bijectivity assertion of Theorem
4.12 (cf. [Mzk2], Corollary 14.2). ⃝
Remark. Thus, Theorem 4.12 states (roughly) that the isomorphism class of a
hyperbolic curve over a ﬁnite extension of the quotient ﬁeld of W(
Fp)m a yb e
recovered from the outer action of the Galois group on its geometric fundamental
group. In particular, one need not make use of Gal(
Fp/Fp) (as was done in [Mzk2]).
In this sense, Theorem 4.12 is reminiscent of the main results of [Tama2],w h i c h
state that in certain cases, the isomorphism class of a hyperbolic curve over
 Fp is
completely determined by the isomorphism class of its geometric fundamental group
(cf. the results of [Tama1], which make essential use of the action of Gal(
Fp/Fp)).
It would be interesting to see if the relationship between Theorem 4.12 and [Tama2]
could be understood more explicitly.
Remark. Another interesting aspect of Theorem 4.12 is the following: Note that,
if K is a ﬁnite extension of the quotient ﬁeld of W(
Fp), then its absolute Galois
group ΓK has cohomological dimension 1 (cf. Lemma 4.13 below). On the other
hand, if X is a hyperbolic curve overK,t h e nΠX
K
has cohomological dimension 2.
Thus, the cohomological dimension of ΠX is equal to 3. Since, roughly speaking,
Theorem 4.12, states that the structure of X is determined by ΠX, Theorem 4.12
is reminiscent of the rigidity theorem of Mostow-Prasad for hyperbolic manifolds of
real dimension 3 (cf. the discussion of [Mzk4], Introduction, §0.10, 2.2.3, 2.2.6).
The following Lemma is, in essence, well-known:
Lemma 4.13. Let K be a ﬁnite extension of the quotient ﬁeld of W(
Fp).T h e n
ΓK is center-free and has cohomological dimension equal to1.
Proof. First, write L for the quotient ﬁeld of W(
Fp), and L′ for the union (inside
L) of the quotient ﬁelds of the W(k), as k ranges over all ﬁnite extensions of Fp.
Then the ring of integersOL′ of L′ is the union of theW(k), hence stictly henselian.
Moreover, since OL = W(
Fp)i st h ep-adic completion ofOL′ , it follows immediately
from the general theory of henselian rings that ΓL =Γ L′ . In particular, since K is a
ﬁnite extension of L, it follows that there exists a ﬁnite extensionK′ of L′ such that
K = L ⊗L′ K′. Moreover, since OK′ is strictly henselian, with completion equal
to OK,w eh a v eΓK =Γ K′ . Thus, it suﬃces to prove that Γ K′ is center-free and
of cohomological dimension equal to 1. In the remainder of the proof, to simplify
notation, we shall simply write K for K
′.
Next, observe that by considering the maximal tamely ramiﬁed extensionKtm
of K, we obtain an exact sequence

48 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
1 → ΓKtm → ΓK →
∏
l̸=p
Zl(1) → 1
(where the product ranges over all prime numbers not equal top). Moreover, let us
recall that ΓKtm is a pro-p-group which is center-free and of cohomological dimen-
sion 1 (cf., e.g., [Mzk2], the proof of Lemma 15.6). We thus obtain immediately
that ΓK is of cohomological dimension 1. To show that Γ K is center-free, it suf-
ﬁces to show Gal( Ktm/K)a c t sfaithfully on Γab
Ktm ⊗ Qp (where “ab” denotes the
maximal abelian quotient). But this may be done as follows: Let K0 ⊆ K be a
ﬁnite extension of Qp such that K/K0 is unramiﬁed. Thus, it follows that Ktm is
also the maximal unramiﬁed extension of K0, so Gal(Ktm/K) ↪→ Gal(Ktm/K0).
Now let L0/K0 be a ﬁnite, Galois, totally tamely ramiﬁed extension of K0.T h e n
L0 ⊆ Ktm,s ow eo b t a i nasurjection:
Γab
Ktm ⊗ Qp ↠ (Γab
L0 )wild ⊗ Qp
(where the superscript “wild” denotes the wild inertia subgroup). But by the class
ﬁeld theory of ﬁnite extensions of Qp, one knows that (Γab
L0 )wild ⊗ Qp is naturally
isomorphic (via the p-adic logarithm — cf., e.g., [Mzk5], §2) to L0, so the action
of Gal(L0/K0)o n( Γ ab
L0 )wild ⊗ Qp is faithful. Since arbitrary ﬁnite quotients of
Gal(Ktm/K) may be realized as “Gal(L0/K0)’s” for appropriate choices ofK0, L0,
it thus follows that Gal( Ktm/K)a c t sfaithfully on Γab
Ktm ⊗ Qp, as desired. This
completes the proof of Lemma 4.13. ⃝
Lemma 4.14. Let K be generalized sub-p-adic. Then ΓK is center-free.
Proof. Let K be an arbitrary generalized sub-p-adic ﬁeld. If XL is any hyperbolic
curve of type (g,r ) over a ﬁnite extension L of K,a n dσ ∈ Z(ΓK) (i.e., the center
of ΓK), then we have an isomorphism
Π(XL)
K
∼= Π(XL)σ
K
(induced by conjugating by σ) which is compatible with the outer actions of ΓL on
both sides.
With this observation in hand, it follows that Lemma 4.14 may be derived
from Lemma 4.13 by means of Theorem 4.12 using exactly the same argument as
that used to derive [Mzk2], Lemma 15.8, from [Mzk2], Lemma 15.6, by means of
[Mzk2], Corollary 15.3. ⃝

TOPICS IN ANABELIAN GEOMETR Y 49
Bibliography
[AG] N. Alling and N. Greenleaf,Foundations of the theory of Klein surfaces, Lecture
Notes in Mathematics 219, Springer Verlag (1971).
[BMS] H. Bass, J. Milnor, and J.-P. Serre,Solution of the congruence subgroup problem
for SLn, (n ≥ 3) and Sp2n, (n ≥ 2), IHES Publ. Math. 33 (1967), pp. 59-137.
[Falt] G. Faltings, Endlichkeitss¨atze f¨ur Abelschen Variet¨aten ¨uber Zahlk¨orpern, Inv.
Math. 73 (1983), pp. 349-366.
[Frdl] E. Friedlander, ´Etale Homotopy of Simplicial Schemes, Annals of Math. Studies
104, Princeton University Press (1982).
[Gard] F. Gardiner, Teichm¨uller Theory and Quadratic Diﬀerentials, John Wiley and
Sons (1987).
[Groth] A. Grothendieck, letter to G. Faltings(June 1983) in Lochak, L. Schneps,Geo-
metric Galois Actions; 1. Around Grothendieck’s Esquisse d’un Programme ,
London Math. Soc. Lect. Note Ser. 242, Cambridge Univ. Press (1997).
[Harts] R. Hartshorne, Algebraic Geometry, Graduate Texts in Mathematics52, Springer
Verlag (1977).
[Huis] J. Huisman, On the fundamental group of a real algebraic curve, manuscript.
[Kerck] S. Kerckhoﬀ, The Nielsen realization problem, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.)
2 (1980), pp. 452-454.
[Krav] S. Kravetz, On the geometry of Teichm¨uller spaces and the structure of their
modular groups, Ann. Acad. Sci. Fenn. Ser. A I 278 (1959), 35 pp.
[Lang] S. Lang, Abelian Varieties, Springer Verlag (1983).
[Laz] M. Lazard, Groupes analytiques p-adiques, IHES Publ. Math. 26 (1965), pp.
389-603.
[Maass] H. Maass, Siegel’s Modular Forms and Dirichlet Series, Lecture Notes in Math-
ematics 216, Springer Verlag (1971).
[Mord] L. Szpiro, S´eminaire sur les pinceaux arithm´etiques: la conjecture de Mordell,
Ast´erisque 127, Soc. Math. France (1985).
[Mzk1] S. Mochizuki, The Proﬁnite Grothendieck Conjecture for Closed Hyperbolic
Curves over Number Fields, J. Math. Sci., Univ. Tokyo 3 (1996), pp. 571-627.
[Mzk2] S. Mochizuki, The Local Pro-p Anabelian Geometry of Curves, Inv. Math. 138
(1999), pp. 319-423.
[Mzk3] S. Mochizuki, A Theory of Ordinary p-adic Curves, Publ. of RIMS 32 (1996),
pp. 957-1151.
[Mzk4] S. Mochizuki, Foundations of p-adic Teichm¨uller Theory, AMS/IP Studies
in Advanced Mathematics 11, American Mathematical Society/International
Press (1999).

50 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
[Mzk5] S. Mochizuki, A Version of the Grothendieck Conjecture forp-adic Local Fields,
The International Journal of Math. 8, No. 4 (1997), pp. 499-506.
[NSW] J. Neukirch, A. Schmidt, K. Wingberg,Cohomology of number ﬁelds, Grundlehren
der Mathematischen Wissenschaften 323, Springer Verlag (2000).
[NTM] H. Nakamura, A. Tamagawa, S. Mochizuki, The Grothendieck Conjecture on
the Fundamental Groups of Algebraic Curves, Sugaku 50 (1998), pp. 113–129;
English translation in Sugaku Expositions (to appear).
[Schd] C. Scheiderer, Real and ´etale cohomology, Lecture Notes in Mathematics1588,
Springer Verlag (1994).
[Ser1] J.-P. Serre, Lie Algebras and Lie Groups, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1500,
Springer Verlag (1992).
[Ser2] J.-P. Serre (with the collaboration of Willem Kuyk and John Labute),Abelian
l-adic Representations and Elliptic Curves, Addison-Wesley Publishing Com-
pany (1989).
[Ser3] J.-P. Serre, Liste des courbes elliptiques `a multiplication complexe dont l’invariant
modulaire j est rational, manuscript.
[Ser4] J.-P. Serre, Local Fields, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 67, Springer Verlag
(1977).
[SGA1] A. Grothendieck et al., Revˆetements ´etales et groupe fondamental , Lecture
Notes in Mathematics 224, Springer Verlag (1971).
[SGA2] A. Grothendieck et al.,Cohomologie Locale des Faisceaux Coh´erents et Th´eor`emes
de Lefshetz Locaux et Globaux, North-Holland, Amsterdam (1968).
[Shi] G. Shimura, Introduction to the Arithmetic Theory of Automorphic Forms ,
Publ. Math. Soc. of Japan11, Iwanami Shoten and Princeton University Press
(1971).
[Stk] H. Stark, A complete determination of the complex quadratic ﬁelds of class-
number one, Michigan Math. J. 14 (1967), pp. 1-27.
[Tama1] A. Tamagawa, The Grothendieck Conjecture for Aﬃne Curves , Compositio
Math. 109, No. 2 (1997), pp. 135-194.
[Tama2] A. Tamagawa, On the tame fundamental groups of curves over algebraically
closed ﬁelds of characteristic > 0, to appear in the present Volume.
[Tate] J. Tate, p-Divisible Groups, Proceedings of a Conference on Local Fields ,
Driebergen, Springer Verlag (1967), pp. 158-183.
[Weber] H. Weber, Lehrbuch der Algebra, Vol. III, Chelsea Publ. Company.
[Wolp] S. Wolpert, Geodesic length functions and the Nielsen problem, J. Diﬀerential
Geom. 25 (1987), pp. 275-296.